A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

Abbas Abdolmaleki * 1 Sandy H. Huang * 1 Leonard Hasenclever 1 Michael Neunert 1 H. Francis Song 1
Martina Zambelli 1 Murilo F. Martins 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Raia Hadsell 1 Martin Riedmiller 1

arXiv:2005.07513v1 [cs.LG] 15 May 2020

Abstract
Many real-world problems require trading off multiple competing objectives. However, these objectives are often in different units and/or scales,
which can make it challenging for practitioners to
express numerical preferences over objectives in
their native units. In this paper we propose a novel
algorithm for multi-objective reinforcement learning that enables setting desired preferences for
objectives in a scale-invariant way. We propose
to learn an action distribution for each objective,
and we use supervised learning to fit a parametric
policy to a combination of these distributions. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
challenging high-dimensional real and simulated
robotics tasks, and show that setting different preferences in our framework allows us to trace out
the space of nondominated solutions.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms do an excellent
job at training policies to optimize a single scalar reward
function. Recent advances in deep RL have made it possible to train policies that exceed human-level performance
on Atari (Mnih et al., 2015) and Go (Silver et al., 2016),
perform complex robotic manipulation tasks (Zeng et al.,
2019), learn agile locomotion (Tan et al., 2018), and even
obtain reward in unanticipated ways (Amodei et al., 2016).
However, many real-world tasks involve multiple, possibly
competing, objectives. For instance, choosing a financial
portfolio requires trading off between risk and return; controlling energy systems requires trading off performance
and cost; and autonomous cars must trade off fuel costs, efficiency, and safety. Multi-objective reinforcement learning
(MORL) algorithms aim to tackle such problems (Roijers
et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2015). A common approach is scalarization: based on preferences across objectives, transform
the multi-objective reward vector into a single scalar re*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Abbas
Abdolmaleki <aabdolmaleki@google.com>, Sandy H. Huang
<shhuang@google.com>.

Figure 1. We demonstrate our approach in four complex continuous control domains, in simulation and in the real world. Videos
are at http://sites.google.com/view/mo-mpo.

ward (e.g., by taking a convex combination), and then use
standard RL to optimize this scalar reward.
It is tricky, though, for practitioners to pick the appropriate
scalarization for a desired preference across objectives, because often objectives are defined in different units and/or
scales. For instance, suppose we want an agent to complete a task while minimizing energy usage and mechanical wear-and-tear. Task completion may correspond to a
sparse reward or to the number of square feet a vacuuming
robot has cleaned, and reducing energy usage and mechanical wear-and-tear could be enforced by penalties on power
consumption (in kWh) and actuator efforts (in N or Nm),
respectively. Practitioners would need to resort to using
trial and error to select a scalarization that ensures the agent
prioritizes actually doing the task (and thus being useful)
over saving energy.
Motivated by this, we propose a scale-invariant approach for
encoding preferences, derived from the RL-as-inference perspective. Instead of choosing a scalarization, practitioners
set a constraint per objective. Based on these constraints, we
learn an action distribution per objective that improves on
the current policy. Then, to obtain a single updated policy
that makes these trade-offs, we use supervised learning to
fit a policy to the combination of these action distributions.
The constraints control the influence of each objective on
the policy, by constraining the KL-divergence between each
objective-specific distribution and the current policy. The
higher the constraint value, the more influence the objective has. Thus, a desired preference over objectives can be
encoded as the relative magnitude of these constraint values.
Fundamentally, scalarization combines objectives in reward
space, whereas our approach combines objectives in distri-

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

bution space, thus making it invariant to the scale of rewards.
In principle, our approach can be combined with any RL
algorithm, regardless of whether it is off-policy or on-policy.
We combine it with maximum a posteriori policy optimization (MPO) (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018a;b), an off-policy
actor-critic RL algorithm, and V-MPO (Song et al., 2020),
an on-policy variant of MPO. We call these two algorithms
multi-objective MPO (MO-MPO) and multi-objective VMPO (MO-V-MPO), respectively.
Our main contribution is providing a distributional view on
MORL, which enables scale-invariant encoding of preferences. We show that this is a theoretically-grounded approach, that arises from taking an RL-as-inference perspective of MORL. Empirically, we analyze the mechanics of
MO-MPO and show it finds all Pareto-optimal policies in a
popular MORL benchmark task. Finally, we demonstrate
that MO-MPO and MO-V-MPO outperform scalarized approaches on multi-objective tasks across several challenging
high-dimensional continuous control domains (Fig. 1).

2. Related Work
2.1. Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning
Multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) algorithms
are either single-policy or multiple-policy (Vamplew et al.,
2011). Single-policy approaches seek to find the optimal
policy for a given scalarization of the multi-objective problem. Often this scalarization is linear, but other choices have
also been explored (Van Moffaert et al., 2013).
However, the scalarization may be unknown at training time,
or it may change over time. Multiple-policy approaches
handle this by finding a set of policies that approximates
the true Pareto front. Some approaches repeatedly call a
single-policy MORL algorithm with strategically-chosen
scalarizations (Natarajan & Tadepalli, 2005; Roijers et al.,
2014; Mossalam et al., 2016; Zuluaga et al., 2016). Other
approaches learn a set of policies simultaneously, by using a
multi-objective variant of the Q-learning update rule (Barrett
& Narayanan, 2008; Moffaert & Nowé, 2014; Reymond &
Nowé, 2019; Yang et al., 2019) or by modifying gradientbased policy search (Parisi et al., 2014; Pirotta et al., 2015).
Most existing approaches for finding the Pareto front are
limited to discrete state and action spaces, in which tabular
algorithms are sufficient. Although recent work combining
MORL with deep RL handles high-dimensional observations, this is in domains with low-dimensional and usually
discrete action spaces (Mossalam et al., 2016; van Seijen
et al., 2017; Friedman & Fontaine, 2018; Abels et al., 2019;
Reymond & Nowé, 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Nottingham
et al., 2019). In contrast, we evaluate our approach on con-

tinuous control tasks with more than 20 action dimensions.1
A couple of recent works have applied deep MORL to find
the Pareto front in continuous control tasks; these works
assume scalarization and rely on additionally learning either a meta-policy (Chen et al., 2019) or inter-objective
relationships (Zhan & Cao, 2019). We take an orthogonal
approach to existing approaches: one encodes preferences
via constraints on the influence of each objective on the
policy update, instead of via scalarization. MO-MPO can
be run multiple times, with different constraint settings, to
find a Pareto front of policies.
2.2. Constrained Reinforcement Learning
An alternate way of setting preferences is to enforce that
policies meet certain constraints. For instance, threshold
lexicographic ordering approaches optimize a (single) objective while meeting specified threshold values on the other
objectives (Gábor et al., 1998), optionally with slack (Wray
et al., 2015). Similarly, safe RL is concerned with learning
policies that optimize a scalar reward while not violating
safety constraints (Achiam et al., 2017; Chow et al., 2018);
this has also been studied in the off-policy batch RL setting
(Le et al., 2019). Related work minimizes costs while ensuring the policy meets a constraint on the minimum expected
return (Bohez et al., 2019), but this requires that the desired
or achievable reward is known a priori. In contrast, MOMPO does not require knowledge of the scale of rewards.
In fact, often there is no easy way to specify constraints on
objectives, e.g., it is difficult to figure out a priori how much
actuator effort a robot will need to use to perform a task.
2.3. Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning
Multi-task reinforcement learning can also be cast as a
MORL problem. Generally these algorithms learn a separate
policy for each task, with shared learning across tasks (Teh
et al., 2017; Riedmiller et al., 2018; Wulfmeier et al., 2019).
In particular, Distral (Teh et al., 2017) learns a shared prior
that regularizes the per-task policies to be similar to each
other, and thus captures essential structure that is shared
across tasks. MO-MPO differs in that the goal is to learn a
single policy that must trade off across different objectives.
Other multi-task RL algorithms seek to train a single agent
to solve different tasks, and thus need to handle different
reward scales across tasks. Prior work uses adaptive normalization for the targets in value-based RL, so that the agent
1
MORL for continuous control tasks is difficult because the
policy can no longer output arbitrary action distributions, which
limits how well it can compromise between competing objectives.
In state-of-the-art RL algorithms for continuous control, policies
typically output a single action (e.g., D4PG (Barth-Maron et al.,
2018)) or a Gaussian (e.g., PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), MPO
(Abdolmaleki et al., 2018b), and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018)).

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

cares equally about all tasks (van Hasselt et al., 2016; Hessel
et al., 2019). Similarly, prior work in multi-objective optimization has dealt with objectives of different units and/or
scales by normalizing objectives to have similar magnitudes
(Marler & Arora, 2005; Grodzevich & Romanko, 2006; Kim
& de Weck, 2006; Daneshmand et al., 2017; Ishibuchi et al.,
2017). MO-MPO can also be seen as doing adaptive normalization, but for any preference over objectives, not just
equal preferences.
In general, invariance to reparameterization of the function
approximator has been investigated in optimization literature resulting in, for example, natural gradient methods
(Martens, 2014). The common tool here is measuring distances in function space instead of parameter space, using
KL-divergence. Similarly in this work, to achieve invariance to the scale of objectives, we use KL-divergence over
policies to encode preferences.

3. Background and Notation
Multi Objective Markov Decision Process. In this paper, we consider a multi-objective RL problem defined by a
multi-objective Markov Decision Process (MO-MDP). The
MO-MDP consists of states s ∈ S and actions a ∈ A,
an initial state distribution p(s0 ), transition probabilities
p(st+1 |st , at ) which define the probability of changing
from state st to st+1 when taking action at , reward functions {rk (s, a) ∈ R}N
k=1 per objective k, and a discount
factor γ ∈ [0, 1). We define our policy πθ (a|s) as a
state conditional distribution over actions parametrized by
θ. Together with the transition probabilities, this gives
rise to a state visitation distribution µ(s). We also consider per-objective action-value functions. The actionvalue function for objective k is defined as the expected
return (i.e., cumulative discounted reward) from choosing
action a in state s for objective
k and then following polP∞
icy π: Qπk (s, a) = Eπ [ t=0 γ t rk (st , at )|s0 = s, a0 = a].
We can represent this function using
the recursive expres

sion Qπk (st , at ) = Ep(st+1 |st ,at ) rk (st , at ) + γVkπ (st+1 ) ,
where Vkπ (s) = Eπ [Qπk (s, a)] is the value function of π for
objective k.
Problem Statement. For any MO-MDP there is a set
of nondominated policies, i.e., the Pareto front. A policy
is nondominated if there is no other policy that improves
its expected return for an objective without reducing the
expected return of at least one other objective. Given a
preference setting, our goal is to find a nondominated policy
πθ that satisfies those preferences. In our approach, a setting
of constraints does not directly correspond to a particular
scalarization, but we show that by varying these constraint
settings, we can indeed trace out a Pareto front of policies.

Algorithm 1 MO-MPO: One policy improvement step
1: given batch size (L), number of actions to sample (M ), (N )
π
N
Q-functions {Qk old (s, a)}N
k=1 , preferences {k }k=1 , previous
N
policy πold , previous temperatures {ηk }k=1 , replay buffer D,
first-order gradient-based optimizer O
2:
3: initialize πθ from the parameters of πold
4: repeat
L,M,N
5: // Collect dataset {si , aij , Qij
, where
k }i,j,k
π
ij
ij
i
6: // M actions a ∼ πold (a|s ) and Qk = Qk old (si , aij )
7:
8: // Compute action distribution for each objective
9: for k = 1, . . . , N do

 ij 
PM 1
P 1
Qk
log
exp
10:
δηk ← ∇ηk ηk k + ηk L
j M
i L
ηk
11:

Update ηk based on δηk , using optimizer O
ij

Q

12:
qkij ∝ exp( ηkk )
13:
end for
14:
15:
// Update parametric
policy
P PM P
N ij
ij i
16:
δπ ← −∇θ L
i
j
k qk log πθ (a |s )
17:
(subject to additional KL regularization, see Sec. 4.2.2)
18:
Update πθ based on δπ , using optimizer O
19:
20: until fixed number of steps
21: return πold = πθ

4. Method
We propose a policy iteration algorithm for multi-objective
RL. Policy iteration algorithms decompose the RL problem
into two sub-problems and iterate until convergence:
1. Policy evaluation: estimate Q-functions given policy
2. Policy improvement: update policy given Q-functions
Algorithm 1 summarizes this two-step multi-objective policy improvement procedure. In Appendix E, we explain how
this can be derived from the “RL as inference” perspective.
We describe multi-objective MPO in this section and explain
multi-objective V-MPO in Appendix D. When there is only
one objective, MO-(V-)MPO reduces to (V-)MPO.
4.1. Multi-Objective Policy Evaluation
In this step we learn Q-functions to evaluate the previous
policy πold . We train a separate Q-function per objective,
following the Q-decomposition approach (Russell & Zimdars, 2003). In principle, any Q-learning algorithm can be
used, as long as the target Q-value is computed with respect
to πold .2 In this paper, we use the Retrace objective (Munos
2
Russell & Zimdars (2003) prove critics suffer from “illusion of
control” if they are trained with conventional Q-learning (Watkins,
1989). In other words, if each critic computes its target Q-value
based on its own best action for the next state, then they overestimate Q-values, because in reality the parametric policy πθ (that
considers all critics’ opinions) is in charge of choosing actions.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

et al., 2016) to learn a Q-function Qπk old (s, a; φk ) for each
objective k, parameterized by φk , as follows:
min

{φk }N
1

N
X

h
E(s,a)∼D

k=1

i
πold
2
Q̂ret
k (s, a) − Qk (s, a; φk )) ,

where Q̂ret
k is the Retrace target for objective k and the
previous policy πold , and D is a replay buffer containing
gathered transitions. See Appendix C for details.
4.2. Multi-Objective Policy Improvement
Given the previous policy πold (a|s) and associated Qfunctions {Qπk old (s, a)}N
k=1 , our goal is to improve the previous policy for a given visitation distribution µ(s).3 To this
end, we learn an action distribution for each Q-function and
combine these to obtain the next policy πnew (a|s). This is a
multi-objective variant of the two-step policy improvement
procedure employed by MPO (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018b).
In the first step, for each objective k we learn an improved
action distribution qk (a|s) such that Eqk (a|s) [Qπk old (s, a)] ≥
Eπold (a|s) [Qπk old (s, a)], where states s are drawn from a visitation distribution µ(s).
In the second step, we combine and distill the improved
distributions qk into a new parametric policy πnew (with
parameters θnew ) by minimizing the KL-divergence between
the distributions and the new parametric policy, i.e,
θnew = argmin
θ

N
X

h 
i
Eµ(s) KL qk (a|s)kπθ (a|s) . (1)

k=1

This is a supervised learning loss that performs maximum
likelihood estimate of distributions qk . Next, we will explain
these two steps in more detail.
4.2.1. O BTAINING ACTION DISTRIBUTIONS PER
OBJECTIVE (S TEP 1)
To obtain the per-objective improved action distributions
qk (a|s), we optimize the standard RL objective for each
objective Qk :
Z
Z
max µ(s) qk (a|s) Qk (s, a) da ds
(2)
qk
s
a
Z
s.t. µ(s) KL(qk (a|s)kπold (a|s)) ds < k ,
s

where k denotes the allowed expected KL divergence for
objective k. We use these k to encode preferences over objectives. More concretely, k defines the allowed influence
of objective k on the change of the policy.
3
In practice, we use draws from the replay buffer to estimate
expectations over the visitation distribution µ(s).

For nonparametric action distributions qk (a|s), we can solve
this constrained optimization problem in closed form for
each state s sampled from µ(s) (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018b),
 Q (s, a) 
k
qk (a|s) ∝ πold (a|s) exp
,
(3)
ηk
where the temperature ηk is computed based on the corresponding k , by solving the following convex dual function:
ηk = argmin η k +
(4)
η
Z
Z
 Q (s, a) 
k
da ds .
η µ(s) log πold (a|s) exp
η
s
a
In order to evaluate qk (a|s) and the integrals in (4), we draw
L states from the replay buffer and, for each state, sample
M actions from the current policy πold . In practice, we
maintain one temperature parameter ηk per objective. We
found that optimizing the dual function by performing a few
steps of gradient descent on ηk is effective, and we initialize
with the solution found in the previous policy iteration step.
Since ηk should be positive, we use a projection operator
after each gradient step to maintain ηk > 0. Please refer to
Appendix C for derivation details.
Application to Other Deep RL Algorithms. Since the
constraints k in (2) encode the preferences over objectives,
solving this optimization problem with good satisfaction
of constraints is key for learning a policy that satisfies the
desired preferences. For nonparametric action distributions
qk (a|s), we can satisfy these constraints exactly. One could
use any policy gradient method (e.g. Schulman et al., 2015;
2017; Heess et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018) to obtain
qk (a|s) in a parametric form instead. However, solving the
constrained optimization for parametric qk (a|s) is not exact,
and the constraints may not be well satisfied, which impedes
the use of k to encode preferences. Moreover, assuming a
parametric qk (a|s) requires maintaining a function approximator (e.g., a neural network) per objective, which can
significantly increase the complexity of the algorithm and
limits scalability.
Choosing k . It is more intuitive to encode preferences via
k rather than via scalarization weights, because the former
is invariant to the scale of rewards. In other words, having a
desired preference across objectives narrows down the range
of reasonable choices for k , but does not narrow down the
range of reasonable choices for scalarization weights. In
order to identify reasonable scalarization weights, a RL practitioner needs to additionally be familiar with the scale of
rewards for each objective. In practice, we have found that
learning performance is robust to a wide range of scales for
k . It is the relative scales of the k that matter for encoding
preferences over objectives—the larger a particular k is
with respect to others, the more that objective k is preferred.
On the other hand, if k = 0, then objective k will have

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

no influence and will effectively be ignored. In Appendix
A.1, we provide suggestions for setting k , given a desired
preference over objectives.
4.2.2. F ITTING A NEW PARAMETRIC POLICY (S TEP 2)
In the previous section, for each objective k, we have obtained an improved action distribution qk (a|s). Next, we
want to combine these distributions to obtain a single parametric policy that trades off the objectives according to
the constraints k that we set. For this, we solve a supervised learning problem that fits a parametric policy to the
per-objective action distributions from step 1,
Z
N Z
X
θnew = argmax
µ(s) qk (a|s) log πθ (a|s) da ds
θ

Z
s.t.
s

k=1

s

a

µ(s) KL(πold (a|s) k πθ (a|s)) ds < β , (5)

where θ are the parameters of our policy (a neural network)
and the KL constraint enforces a trust region of size β that
limits the overall change in the parametric policy. The KL
constraint in this step has a regularization effect that prevents the policy from overfitting to the sample-based action
distributions, and therefore avoids premature convergence
and improves stability of learning (Schulman et al., 2015;
Abdolmaleki et al., 2018a;b).
Similar to the first policy improvement step, we evaluate
the integrals by using the L states sampled from the replay
buffer and the M actions per state sampled from the old
policy. In order to optimize (5) using gradient descent, we
employ Lagrangian relaxation, similar to in MPO (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018a) (see Appendix C for more detail).

5. Experiments: Toy Domains
In the empirical evaluation that follows, we will first demonstrate the mechanics and scale-invariance of MO-MPO in
a single-state environment (Sec. 5.1), and then show that
MO-MPO can find all Pareto-dominant policies in a popular
MORL benchmark (Sec. 5.2). Finally, we show the benefit
of using MO-MPO in high-dimensional continuous control
domains, including on a real robot (Sec. 6). Appendices
A and B contain a detailed description of all domains and
tasks, experimental setups, and implementation details.
Baselines. The goal of our empirical evaluation is to
analyze the benefit of using our proposed multi-objective
policy improvement step (Sec. 4.2.2), that encodes preferences over objectives via constraints k on expected KLdivergences, rather than via weights wk . Thus, we primarily
compare MO-MPO against scalarized MPO, which relies
on linear scalarization weights wk to encode preferences.
The only difference between MO-MPO and scalarized MPO
is the policy improvement step: for scalarized MPO, a single

Figure 2. A simple environment in which the agent starts at state
S0 , and chooses to navigate to one of three terminal states. There
are two objectives. Taking the left action, for instance, leads to
a reward of 1 for the first objective and 4 for the second.

improved
action distribution q(a|s) is computed, based on
P
w
Q
(s, a) and a single KL constraint .
k
k
k
State-of-the-art approaches that combine MORL with deep
RL assume linear scalarization as well, either learning a
separate policy for each setting of weights (Mossalam et al.,
2016) or learning a single policy conditioned on scalarization weights (Friedman & Fontaine, 2018; Abels et al.,
2019). Scalarized MPO addresses the former problem,
which is easier. The policy evaluation step in scalarized
MPO is analagous to scalarized Q-learning, proposed by
Mossalam et al. (2016). As we show later in Sec. 6, even
learning an optimal policy for a single scalarization is difficult in high-dimensional continuous control domains.
5.1. Simple World
First, we will examine the behavior of MO-MPO in a simple
multi-armed bandit with three actions (up, right, and
left) (Fig. 2), inspired by Russell & Zimdars (2003).
We train policies with scalarized MPO and with MO-MPO.
The policy evaluation step is exact because the Q-value
function for each objective is known: it is equal to the
reward received for that objective after taking each action,
as labeled in Fig. 2.4
We consider three possible desired preferences: equal preference for the two objectives, preferring the first, and preferring the second. Encoding preferences in scalarized
MPO amounts to choosing appropriate linear scalarization
weights, and in MO-MPO amounts to choosing appropriate
’s. We use the following weights and ’s:
• equal preference: weights [0.5, 0.5] or ’s [0.01, 0.01]
• prefer first: weights [0.9, 0.1] or ’s [0.01, 0.002]
• prefer second: weights [0.1, 0.9] or ’s [0.002, 0.01]
We set  = 0.01 for scalarized MPO. If we start with a
4
The policy improvement step can also be computed exactly,
because solving for the optimal temperature η (or η1 and η2 in the
MO-MPO case) is a convex optimization problem, and the KLconstrained policy update is also a convex optimization problem
when there is only one possible state. We use CVXOPT (Andersen
et al., 2020) as our convex optimization solver.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

The scale of k controls the amount that objective k can
influence the policy’s update. If we set 1 = 0.01 and sweep
over the range from 0 to 0.01 for 2 , the resulting policies go
from always picking right, to splitting probability across
right and up, to always picking up (Fig. 4, right). In
contrast, setting weights leads to policies quickly converging
to placing all probability on a single action (Fig. 4, left).
We hypothesize this limits the ability of scalarized MPO
to explore and find compromise policies (that perform well
with respect to all objectives) in more challenging domains.
5.2. Deep Sea Treasure
An important quality of any MORL approach is the ability
to find a variety of policies on the true Pareto front (Roijers
et al., 2013). We demonstrate this in Deep Sea Treasure
(DST) (Vamplew et al., 2011), a popular benchmark for testing MORL approaches. DST consists of a 11×10 grid world
with ten treasure locations. The agent starts in the upper left
corner (s0 = (0, 0)) and has a choice of four actions (moving one square up, right, down, and left). When the
agent picks up a treasure, the episode terminates. The agent
has two objectives: treasure value and time penalty. The
time penalty is −1 for each time step that the agent takes,
and farther-away treasures have higher treasure values. We
use the treasure values in Yang et al. (2019).
We ran scalarized MPO with weightings [w, 1 − w] and

prefer first

prefer second

0.5
0.0
1.0
0.5
0.0

left

up

right

left

scalarized
distributional

up

right

left

up

right

scalarized, imbalanced rewards
distributional, imbalanced rewards

Figure 3. When two objectives have comparable reward scales
(solid bars), scalarized MPO (first row) and MO-MPO (second row)
learn similar policies, across three different preferences. However,
when the scale of the first objective is much higher (striped bars),
scalarized MPO shifts to always preferring the first objective. In
contrast, MO-MPO is scale-invariant and still learns policies that
satisfy the preferences. The y-axis denotes action probability.

scalarized

1

1

scalarized

[1,0]
[1,0]

[.5,.5]
[.5,.5]
0

distributional
scalarized [𝜖1, 𝜖2]
[1,0]
1 1 distributional [.01,0]
[.01,0]

[w1, w2]

[0,1]
0 0.0 0.5 1.0 [0,1]
0.0 0.5
1.0
p(left)
p(left)

p(right)

Even in this simple environment, we see that MO-MPO’s
scale-invariant way of encoding preferences is valuable. In
more complex domains, in which the Q-value functions
must be learned in parallel with the policy, the (automatic)
dynamic adjustment of temperatures ηk per objective becomes more essential (Sec. 6).

equal preference

p(right)

However, if we make the rewards imbalanced by multiplying the rewards obtained for the first objective by 20 (e.g.,
left now obtains a reward of [20, 4]), we see that the policies learned by scalarized MPO shift to preferring the optimal action for the first objective (right) in both the equal
preference and prefer second cases (Fig. 3, striped bars).
In contrast, the final policies for MO-MPO are the same as
for balanced rewards, because in each policy improvement
step, MO-MPO optimizes for a separate temperature ηk that
scales each objective’s Q-value function. This ηk is computed based on the corresponding allowed KL-divergence
k , so when the rewards for any objective k are multiplied
by a factor but k remains the same, the computed ηk ends
up being scaled by that factor as well, neutralizing the effect
of the scaling of rewards (see Eq. (4)).

1.0

p(right)

uniform policy and run MPO with β = 0.001 until the
policy converges, scalarized MPO and MO-MPO result in
similar policies (Fig. 3, solid bars): up for equal preference,
right for prefer first, and left for prefer second.

[.01,.01]
[.01,.01]
[.5,.5]
0

[0,.01]
0 0.0 0.5 1.0 [0,.01]
[0,1]
0.0 0.5
1.0
p(left)
p(left)

Figure 4. A visualization of policies during learning—each curve
corresponds to a particular setting of weights (left) or ’s (right).
Policies are initialized as uniform (the blue dot), and are trained
until convergence. Each point (x, y) corresponds to the policy
with p(left) = x, p(right) = y, and p(up) = 1 − x − y. The
top left and bottom right blue stars denote the optimal policy for
the first and second objectives, respectively.

w ∈ [0, 0.01, 0.02, . . . , 1]. All policies converged to a point
on the true Pareto front, and all but three found the optimal
policy for that weighting. In terms of coverage, policies
were found for eight out of ten points on the Pareto front.5
We ran MO-MPO on this task as well, for a range of :
time ∈ [0.01, 0.02, 0.05] and treasure = c ∗ time , where
c ∈ [0.5, 0.51, 0.52, . . . , 1.5]. All runs converged to a policy
on the true Pareto front, and MO-MPO finds policies for all
ten points on the front (Fig. 5, left). Note that it is the ratio
of ’s that matters, rather than the exact settings—across
all settings of time , similar ratios of treasure to time result
in similar policies; as this ratio increases, policies tend to
prefer higher-value treasures (Fig. 5, right).
5

Since scalarized MPO consistently finds the optimal policy
for any given weighting in this task, with a more strategic selection
of weights, we expect policies for all ten points would be found.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

fingers and 24 degrees of freedom, actuated by 20 motors.
The observation consists of joint angles, joint velocities,
and touch sensors, for a total of 63 dimensions. The touch
and turn tasks terminate when the goal is reached or after 5
seconds, and the orient task terminates after 10 seconds.

Figure 5. Left: Blue stars mark the true Pareto front for Deep Sea
Treasure. MO-MPO, with a variety of settings for k , discovers
all points on the true Pareto front. The area of the orange circles
is proportional to the number of k settings that converged to
that point. Right: As more preference is given to the treasure
objective (i.e., as x increases), policies tend to prefer higher-value
treasures. Each orange dot in the scatterplot corresponds to a
particular setting of k .

6. Experiments: Continuous Control Domains
The advantage of encoding preferences via ’s, rather than
via weights, is apparent in more complex domains. We compared our approaches, MO-MPO and MO-V-MPO, against
scalarized MPO and V-MPO in four high-dimensional continuous control domains, in MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012)
and on a real robot. The domains we consider are:
Humanoid: We use the humanoid run task defined in DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018). Policies must optimize for horizontal speed h while minimizing energy usage.
The task reward is min(h/10, 1) where h is in meters per
second, and the energy usage penalty is action `2-norm. The
humanoid has 21 degrees of freedom, and the observation
consists of joint angles, joint velocities, head height, hand
and feet positions, torso vertical orientation, and center-ofmass velocity, for a total of 67 dimensions.
Shadow Hand: We consider three tasks on the Shadow
Dexterous Hand: touch, turn, and orient. In the touch and
turn tasks, policies must complete the task while minimizing “pain.” A sparse task reward of 1.0 is given for pressing
the block with greater than 5N of force or for turning the
dial from a random initial location to the target location.
The pain penalty penalizes the robot for colliding with objects at high speed; this penalty is defined as in Huang et al.
(2019). In the orient task, there are three aligned objectives:
touching the rectangular peg, lifting it to a given height, and
orienting it to be perpendicular to the ground. All three
rewards are between 0 and 1. The Shadow Hand has five

Humanoid Mocap: We consider a large-scale humanoid
motion capture tracking task, similar to in Peng et al. (2018),
in which policies must learn to follow motion capture reference data.6 There are five objectives, each capturing a
different aspect of the similarity of the pose between the
simulated humanoid and the mocap target: joint orientations,
joint velocities, hand and feet positions, center-of-mass positions, and certain body positions and joint angles. These
objectives are described in detail in Appendix B.4. In order
to balance these multiple objectives, prior work relied on
heavily-tuned reward functions (e.g. Peng et al., 2018). The
humanoid has 56 degrees of freedom and the observation is
1021-dimensional, consisting of proprioceptive observations
as well as six steps of motion capture reference frames. In
total, we use about 40 minutes of locomotion mocap data,
making this an extremely challenging domain.
Sawyer Peg-in-Hole: We train a Rethink Robotics Sawyer
robot arm to insert a cylindrical peg into a hole, while minimizing wrist forces. The task reward is shaped toward
positioning the peg directly above the hole and increases
for insertion, and the penalty is the `1-norm of Cartesian
forces measured by the wrist force-torque sensor. The latter
implicitly penalizes contacts and impacts, as well as excessive directional change (due to the gripper’s inertia inducing
forces when accelerating). We impose a force threshold
to protect the hardware—if this threshold is exceeded, the
episode is terminated. The action space is the end effector’s
Cartesian velocity, and the observation is 102-dimensional,
consisting of Cartesian position, joint position and velocity,
wrist force-torque, and joint action, for three timesteps.
6.1. Evaluation Metric
We run MO-(V-)MPO and scalarized (V-)MPO with a wide
range of constraint settings k and scalarization weights
wk , respectively, corresponding to a wide range of possible
desired preferences. (The exact settings are provided in
Appendix A.) For tasks with two objectives, we plot the
Pareto front found by each approach. We also compute
the hypervolume of each found Pareto front; this metric is
commonly-used for evaluating MORL algorithms (Vamplew
et al., 2011). Given a set of policies Π and a reference policy
r that is dominated by all policies in this set, this metric is
the hypervolume of the space of all policies that dominate
r and are dominated by at least one policy in Π. We use
DEAP (Fortin et al., 2012) to compute hypervolumes.
6
This task was developed concurrently by Anonymous (2020)
and does not constitute a contribution of this paper.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

task reward
task
task reward
reward

mid-training
ofofof
training
scale
penalty
mid-trainingend
end
trainingnormal
normal
scale 10x
10x
penalty
1x penalty
mid-training
end
training
normal
scale
10x
penalty
800
800
800
400
400
400
0 00

3000
3000 000
3000

3000
3000 00 0 3000
3000 00 0
3000
3000
action
norm
penalty
action
norm
penalty
action
norm
penalty
action
norm
penalty

MO-MPO
MO-MPO
MO-MPO
MO-MPO
touch

turn
turn

orient
orient
150
150
angle
angle

task reward
task reward

scalarized
MPO
scalarized
MPO
scalarized
MPO
scalarized
MPO

touch

mid-training
end of
training
touch,
touch,
mid-training
mid-training
touch
touch

0.50.5

30000
30000 00 0
30000

0.00.0
55
00
55
00
55
00
pain
painpenalty
penalty pain
painpenalty
penalty pain
painpenalty
penalty

00
0 0 100
100
zz

Figure 6. Pareto fronts found by MO-MPO and scalarized MOMPO for humanoid run (top row) and Shadow Hand tasks. Each
dot represents a single trained policy. Corresponding hypervolumes are in Table 1. Task reward is discounted for touch and turn,
with a discount factor of 0.99. For orient, the x and y axes are the
total reward for the lift and orientation objectives, respectively.

6.2. Results: Humanoid and Shadow Hand
In the run, touch, and turn tasks, the two objectives are
competing—a very high preference for minimizing action
norm or pain, as opposed to getting task reward, will result
in a policy that always chooses zero-valued actions. Across
these three tasks, the Pareto front found by MO-MPO is
superior to the one found by scalarized MPO, with respect
to the hypervolume metric (Table 1).7 In particular, MOMPO finds more policies that perform well with respect to
both objectives, i.e., are in the upper right portion of the
Pareto front. MO-MPO also speeds up learning on run and
touch (Fig. 6). Qualitatively, MO-MPO trains run policies
that look more natural and “human-like”; videos are at
http://sites.google.com/view/mo-mpo.
When we scale the action norm penalty by 10× for run,
scalarized MPO policies no longer achieve high task reward,
whereas MO-MPO policies do (Fig. 6, top right). This
supports that MO-MPO’s encoding of preferences is indeed
scale-invariant. When the objectives are aligned and have
similarly scaled rewards, as in the orient task, MO-MPO
and scalarized MPO perform similarly, as expected.
Ablation. We also ran vanilla MPO on humanoid run, with
the same range of weight settings as for scalarized MPO, to
investigate how useful Q-decomposition is. In vanilla MPO,
we train a single critic on the scalarized reward function,
We use hypervolume reference points of [0, −104 ] for run,
[0, −105 ] for run with 10× penalty, [0, −20] for touch and turn,
and the zero vector for orient and humanoid mocap.
7

Task

scalarized MPO MO-MPO

Humanoid run, mid-training
Humanoid run

1.1×106
6.4×106

3.3×106
7.1×106

Humanoid run, 1× penalty
Humanoid run, 10× penalty

5.0×106
2.6×107

5.9×106
6.9×107

Shadow touch, mid-training
Shadow touch
Shadow turn
Shadow orient

14.3
16.2
14.4
2.8×104

15.6
16.4
15.4
2.8×104

Humanoid Mocap

3.86×10−6

3.41×10−6

Table 1. Hypervolume measurements across tasks and approaches.

which is equivalent to removing Q-decomposition from
scalarized MPO. Vanilla MPO trains policies that achieve
similar task reward (up to 800), but with twice the action
norm penalty (up to −104 ). As a result, the hypervolume
of the Pareto front that vanilla MPO finds is more than a
magnitude worse than that of scalarized MPO and MO-MPO
(2.2×106 versus 2.6×107 and 6.9×107 , respectively).
6.3. Results: Humanoid Mocap
The objectives in this task are mostly aligned. In contrast to
the other experiments, we use V-MPO (Song et al., 2020) as
the base algorithm because it outperforms MPO in learning
this task. In addition, since V-MPO is an on-policy variant of MPO, this enables us to evaluate our approach in
the on-policy setting. Each training run is very computationally expensive, so we train only a handful of policies
each.8 None of the MO-V-MPO policies are dominated
by those found by V-MPO. In fact, although the weights
span a wide range of “preferences” for the joint velocity, the
only policies found by V-MPO that are not dominated by a
MO-V-MPO policy are those with extreme values for joint
velocity reward (either ≤ 0.006 or ≥ 0.018), whereas it is
between 0.0103 and 0.0121 for MO-V-MPO policies.
Although the hypervolume of the Pareto front found by VMPO is higher than that of MO-V-MPO (Table 1), finding
policies that over- or under- prioritize any objective is undesirable. Qualitatively, the policies trained with MO-V-MPO
look more similar to the mocap reference data—they exhibit
less feet jittering, compared to those trained with scalarized
V-MPO; this can be seen in the corresponding video.
6.4. Results: Sawyer Peg-in-Hole
In this task, we would like the robot to prioritize successful
task completion, while minimizing wrist forces. With this
8
For MO-V-MPO, we set all k = 0.01. Also, for each objective, we set k = 0.001 and set all others to 0.01. For V-MPO,
we fix the weights of four objectives to reasonable values, and try
weights of [0.1, 0.3, 0.6, 1, 5] for matching joint velocities.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization
wrist force penalty

200

400

−1200 −800

task reward

0

200000
400000
0
200000
number of policy improvement steps

MO-MPO

scalarized MPO [0.95, 0.05]

400000
[0.8, 0.2]

Figure 7. Task reward (left) and wrist force penalty (right) learning
curves for the Sawyer peg-in-hole task. The policy trained with
MO-MPO quickly learns to optimize both objectives, whereas the
other two do not. Each line represents a single trained policy.

in mind, for MO-MPO we set task = 0.1 and force = 0.05,
and for scalarized MPO we try [wtask , wforce ] = [0.95, 0.05]
and [0.8, 0.2]. We find that policies trained with scalarized
MPO focus all learning on a single objective at the beginning
of training; we also observed this in the touch task, where
scalarized MPO policies quickly learn to either maximize
task reward or minimize pain penalty, but not both (Fig. 6,
bottom left). In contrast, the policy trained with MO-MPO
simultaneously optimizes for both objectives throughout
training. In fact, throughout training, the MO-MPO policy
does just as well with respect to task reward as the scalarized
MPO policy that cares more about task reward, and similarly
for wrist force penalty (Fig. 7).

7. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we presented a new distributional perspective
on multi objective reinforcement learning, that is derived
from the Rl-as-inference perspective. This view leads to two
novel multi-objective RL algorithms, namely MO-MPO and
MO-V-MPO. We showed these algorithms enable practitioners to encode preferences in a scale-invariant way. Although
MO-(V-)MPO is a single-policy approach to MORL, it is
capable of producing a variety of Pareto-dominant policies.
A limitation of this work is that we produced this set of
policies by iterating over a relatively large number of ’s,
which is computationally expensive. In future work, we
plan to extend MO-(V-)MPO into a true multiple-policy
MORL approach, either by conditioning the policy on settings of ’s or by developing a way to strategically select ’s
to train policies for, analogous to what prior work has done
for weights (e.g., Roijers et al. (2014)).

References
Abdolmaleki, A., Springenberg, J. T., Degrave, J., Bohez, S.,
Tassa, Y., Belov, D., Heess, N., and Riedmiller, M. Relative entropy regularized policy iteration. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.02256, 2018a.
Abdolmaleki, A., Springenberg, J. T., Tassa, Y., Munos, R.,
Heess, N., and Riedmiller, M. Maximum a posteriori
policy optimisation. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2018b.
Abels, A., Roijers, D. M., Lenaerts, T., Nowé, A., and
Steckelmacher, D. Dynamic weights in multi-objective
deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
2019.
Achiam, J., Held, D., Tamar, A., and Abbeel, P. Constrained
policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
22–31, 2017.
Amodei, D., Olah, C., Steinhardt, J., Christiano, P., Schulman, J., and Mané, D. Concrete problems in AI safety.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565, 2016.
Andersen, M. S., Dahl, J., and Vandenberghe, L. CVXOPT:
A Python package for convex optimization, version 1.2.
https://cvxopt.org/, 2020.
Anonymous. CoMic: Co-Training and Mimicry for
Reusable Skills. 2020.
Barrett, L. and Narayanan, S. Learning all optimal policies
with multiple criteria. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
41–47, 2008.
Barth-Maron, G., Hoffman, M. W., Budden, D., Dabney, W.,
Horgan, D., TB, D., Muldal, A., Heess, N., and Lillicrap,
T. Distributed distributional deterministic policy gradients. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Bohez, S., Abdolmaleki, A., Neunert, M., Buchli, J., Heess,
N., and Hadsell, R. Value constrained model-free continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04623, 2019.

Acknowledgments

Chen, X., Ghadirzadeh, A., Björkman, M., and Jensfelt, P.
Meta-learning for multi-objective reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03376, 2019.

The authors would like to thank Guillaume Desjardins,
Csaba Szepesvari, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Steven Bohez,
Philemon Brakel, Brendan Tracey, Jonas Degrave, Jonas
Buchli, Leslie Fritz, Chloe Rosenberg, and many others at
DeepMind for their support and feedback on this paper.

Chentanez, N., Müller, M., Macklin, M., Makoviychuk, V.,
and Jeschke, S. Physics-based motion capture imitation
with deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Motion, Interaction, and Games (MIG). ACM,
2018.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

Chow, Y., Nachum, O., Duenez-Guzman, E., and
Ghavamzadeh, M. A Lyapunov-based approach to safe
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 8092–8101, 2018.
Daneshmand, M., Tale Masouleh, M., Saadatzi, M. H.,
Ozcinar, C., and Anbarjafari, G. A robust proportionpreserving composite objective function for scaleinvariant multi-objective optimization. Scientia Iranica,
24(6):2977–2991, 2017.
Fortin, F.-A., De Rainville, F.-M., Gardner, M.-A., Parizeau,
M., and Gagné, C. DEAP: Evolutionary algorithms made
easy. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13:2171–
2175, July 2012.
Friedman, E. and Fontaine, F. Generalizing across multiobjective reward functions in deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.06364, 2018.
Gábor, Z., Kalmár, Z., and Szepesvári, C. Multi-criteria
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
pp. 197–205, 1998.
Grodzevich, O. and Romanko, O. Normalization and other
topics in multi-objective optimization. In Proceedings of
the Fields-MITACS Industrial Problems Workshop, 2006.
Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft
actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceedings of
the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 1861–1870, 2018.
Heess, N., Wayne, G., Silver, D., Lillicrap, T., Erez, T., and
Tassa, Y. Learning continuous control policies by stochastic value gradients. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 28 (NIPS). 2015.
Hessel, M., Soyer, H., Espeholt, L., Czarnecki, W., Schmitt,
S., and van Hasselt, H. Multi-task deep reinforcement
learning with popart. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3796–3803,
2019.

Kim, I. and de Weck, O. Adaptive weighted sum method
for multiobjective optimization: A new method for pareto
front generation. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 31(2):105–116, 2006.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Le, H., Voloshin, C., and Yue, Y. Batch policy learning
under constraints. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
3703–3712, 2019.
Levine, S., Finn, C., Darrell, T., and Abbeel, P. End-to-end
training of deep visuomotor policies. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 17(39):1–40, 2016.
Liu, C., Xu, X., and Hu, D. Multiobjective reinforcement
learning: A comprehensive overview. IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 45(3):385–
398, 2015.
Marler, R. T. and Arora, J. S. Function-transformation
methods for multi-objective optimization. Engineering
Optimization, 37(6):551–570, 2005.
Martens, J. New perspectives on the natural gradient method.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.1193, 2014.
Merel, J., Ahuja, A., Pham, V., Tunyasuvunakool, S., Liu,
S., Tirumala, D., Heess, N., and Wayne, G. Hierarchical visuomotor control of humanoids. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness,
J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):
529, 2015.
Moffaert, K. V. and Nowé, A. Multi-objective reinforcement
learning using sets of Pareto dominating policies. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 15:3663–3692, 2014.
Mossalam, H., Assael, Y. M., Roijers, D. M., and Whiteson,
S. Multi-objective deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1610.02707, 2016.

Huang, S. H., Zambelli, M., Kay, J., Martins, M. F., Tassa,
Y., Pilarski, P. M., and Hadsell, R. Learning gentle object
manipulation with curiosity-driven deep reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.08542, 2019.

Munos, R., Stepleton, T., Harutyunyan, A., and Bellemare,
M. Safe and efficient off-policy reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1054–1062,
2016.

Ishibuchi, H., Doi, K., and Nojima, Y. On the effect of
normalization in MOEA/D for multi-objective and manyobjective optimization. Complex & Intelligent Systems, 3
(4):279–294, 2017.

Natarajan, S. and Tadepalli, P. Dynamic preferences in
multi-criteria reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
the 22nd International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 601–608, 2005.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

Nottingham, K., Balakrishnan, A., Deshmukh, J., Christopherson, C., and Wingate, D. Using logical specifications
of objectives in multi-objective reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01723, 2019.
Parisi, S., Pirotta, M., Smacchia, N., Bascetta, L., and
Restelli, M. Policy gradient approaches for multiobjective sequential decision making. In Proceedings
of the International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN), pp. 2323–2330, 2014.
Peng, X. B., Abbeel, P., Levine, S., and van de Panne, M.
Deepmimic: Example-guided deep reinforcement learning of physics-based character skills. ACM Transactions
on Graphics, 37(4), 2018.
Pirotta, M., Parisi, S., and Restelli, M. Multi-objective
reinforcement learning with continuous Pareto frontier
approximation. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2015.
Reymond, M. and Nowé, A. Pareto-DQN: Approximating the Pareto front in complex multi-objective decision
problems. In Proceedings of the Adaptive and Learning
Agents Workshop at the 18th International Conference
on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems AAMAS,
2019.
Riedmiller, M., Hafner, R., Lampe, T., Neunert, M., Degrave, J., Van de Wiele, T., Mnih, V., Heess, N., and Springenberg, J. T. Learning by playing - solving sparse reward
tasks from scratch. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.10567,
2018.
Roijers, D. M., Vamplew, P., Whiteson, S., and Dazeley, R.
A survey of multi-objective sequential decision-making.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 48(1):67–113,
2013.
Roijers, D. M., Whiteson, S., and Oliehoek, F. A. Linear
support for multi-objective coordination graphs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS), pp. 1297–
1304, 2014.
Russell, S. and Zimdars, A. L. Q-decomposition for reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference on International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 656–663, 2003.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., and Moritz,
P. Trust region policy optimization. In Proceedings of
the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2015.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Shadow Robot Company.
Shadow dexterous hand.
https://www.shadowrobot.com/products/
dexterous-hand/, 2020.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L.,
van den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I.,
Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., Dieleman, S., Grewe,
D., Nham, J., Kalchbrenner, N., Sutskever, I., Lillicrap, T.,
Leach, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., Graepel, T., and Hassabis,
D. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks
and tree search. Nature, 529:484–503, 2016.
Song, H. F., Abdolmaleki, A., Springenberg, J. T., Clark,
A., Soyer, H., Rae, J. W., Noury, S., Ahuja, A., Liu,
S., Tirumala, D., Heess, N., Belov, D., Riedmiller, M.,
and Botvinick, M. M. V-MPO: On-policy maximum a
posteriori policy optimization for discrete and continuous control. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2020.
Sutton, R. S. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal
differences. Machine learning, 3(1):9–44, 1988.
Tan, J., Zhang, T., Coumans, E., Iscen, A., Bai, Y., Hafner,
D., Bohez, S., and Vanhoucke, V. Sim-to-real: Learning
agile locomotion for quadruped robots. In Proceedings
of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2018.
Tassa, Y., Doron, Y., Muldal, A., Erez, T., Li, Y.,
de Las Casas, D., Budden, D., Abdolmaleki, A., Merel, J.,
Lefrancq, A., Lillicrap, T., and Riedmiller, M. Deepmind
control suite. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
Teh, Y. W., Bapst, V., Czarnecki, W. M., Quan, J., Kirkpatrick, J., Hadsell, R., Heess, N., and Pascanu, R. Distral:
Robust multitask reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. Mujoco: A physics
engine for model-based control. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), pp. 5026–5033, 2012.
Vamplew, P., Dazeley, R., Berry, A., Issabekov, R., and
Dekker, E. Empirical evaluation methods for multiobjective reinforcement learning algorithms. Machine Learning, 84(1):51–80, Jul 2011.
van Hasselt, H. P., Guez, A., Hessel, M., Mnih, V., and Silver, D. Learning values across many orders of magnitude.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp. 4287–4295, 2016.
Van Moffaert, K., Drugan, M. M., and Nowé, A. Scalarized multi-objective reinforcement learning: Novel design techniques. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium
on Adaptive Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement
Learning (ADPRL), pp. 191–199, 2013.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

van Seijen, H., Fatemi, M., Romoff, J., Laroche, R., Barnes,
T., and Tsang, J. Hybrid reward architecture for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), pp. 5398–5408, 2017.
Watkins, C. J. C. H. Learning from Delayed Rewards. PhD
thesis, King’s College, Cambridge, UK, May 1989.
Wray, K. H., Zilberstein, S., and Mouaddib, A.-I. Multiobjective MDPs with conditional lexicographic reward
preferences. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 3418–
3424, 2015.
Wulfmeier, M., Abdolmaleki, A., Hafner, R., Springenberg,
J. T., Neunert, M., Hertweck, T., Lampe, T., Siegel, N.,
Heess, N., and Riedmiller, M. Regularized hierarchical
policies for compositional transfer in robotics. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.11228, 2019.
Yang, R., Sun, X., and Narasimhan, K. A generalized algorithm for multi-objective reinforcement learning and policy adaptation. In Proceedings of the 32nd International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), pp. 14610–14621, 2019.
Zeng, A., Song, S., Lee, J., Rodriguez, A., and Funkhouser,
T. Tossingbot: Learning to throw arbitrary objects with
residual physics. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science
and Systems (RSS), 2019.
Zhan, H. and Cao, Y. Relationship explainable multiobjective optimization via vector value function based
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01919,
2019.
Zuluaga, M., Krause, A., and Püschel, M. -pal: An active learning approach to the multi-objective optimization
problem. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):
3619–3650, 2016.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

A. Experiment Details
In this section, we describe implementation details and specify the hyperparameters used for our algorithm. In all our
experiments, the policy and critic(s) are implemented with
feed-forward neural networks. We use Adam (Kingma &
Ba, 2015) for optimization.
In our continuous control tasks, the policy returns a Gaussian distribution with a diagonal covariance matrix, i.e,
πθ (a|s) = N (µ, Σ). The policy is parametrized by a
neural network, which outputs the mean µ = µ(s) and diagonal Cholesky factors A = A(s), such that Σ = AAT .
The diagonal factor A has positive diagonal elements enforced by the softplus transform Aii ← log(1 + exp(Aii ))
to ensure positive definiteness of the diagonal covariance
matrix.
Table 2 shows the default hyperparameters that we use for
MO-MPO and scalarized MPO, and Table 3 shows the hyperparameters that differ from these defaults for the humanoid, Shadow Hand, and Sawyer experiments. For all
tasks that we train policies with MO-MPO for, a separate
critic is trained for each objective, with a shared first layer.
The only exception is the action norm penalty in humanoid
run, which is computed exactly from the action. We found
that for both policy and critic networks, layer normalization
of the first layer followed by a hyperbolic tangent (tanh) is
important for the stability of the algorithm.
In our experiments comparing the Pareto front found by
MO-MPO versus scalarized MPO, we ran MO-MPO with a
range of k settings and ran scalarized MPO with a range of
weight settings, to obtain a set of policies for each algorithm.
The settings for humanoid run and the Shadow Hand tasks
are listed in Table 4. The settings for humanoid mocap and
Sawyer are specified in the main paper, in Sec. 6.3 and 6.4,
respectively.
In the following subsections, we first give suggestions for
choosing appropriate k to encode a particular preference
(Sec. A.1), then we describe the discrete MO-MPO used
for Deep Sea Treasure (Sec. A.2), and finally we describe
implementation details for humanoid mocap (Sec. A.3).
A.1. Suggestions for Setting 
Our proposed algorithm, MO-(V-)MPO, requires practitioners to translate a desired preference across objectives to numerical choices for k for each objective k. At first glance,
this may seem daunting. However, in practice, we have
found that encoding preferences via k is often more intuitive than doing so via scalarization. In this subsection,
we seek to give an intuition on how to set k for different
desired preferences. Recall that each k controls the influence of objective k on the policy update, by constraining the
KL-divergence between each objective-specific distribution

Hyperparameter

Default

policy network
layer sizes
take tanh of action mean?
minimum variance
maximum variance

(300, 200)
yes
10−12
unbounded

critic network(s)
layer sizes
take tanh of action?
Retrace sequence size
discount factor γ
both policy and critic networks
layer norm on first layer?
tanh on output of layer norm?
activation (after each hidden layer)

(400, 400, 300)
yes
8
0.99
yes
yes
ELU

MPO
actions sampled per state
default 
KL-constraint on policy mean, βµ
KL-constraint on policy covariance, βΣ
initial temperature η
training
batch size
replay buffer size
Adam learning rate
Adam 
target network update period

20
0.1
10−3
10−5
1
512
106
3×10−4
10−3
200

Table 2. Default hyperparameters for MO-MPO and scalarized
MPO, with decoupled update on mean and covariance (Sec. C.3).

and the current policy (Sec. 4.1). We generally choose k in
the range of 0.001 to 0.1.
Equal Preference. When all objectives are equally important, the general rule is to set all k to the same value. We
did this in our orient and humanoid mocap tasks, where objectives are aligned or mostly aligned. In contrast, it can be
tricky to choose appropriate weights in linear scalarization
to encode equal preferences—setting all weights equal to
1/K (where K is the number of objectives) is only appropriate if the objectives’ rewards are of similar scales. We
explored this in Sec. 5.1 and Fig. 3.
When setting all k to the same value, what should this
value be? The larger k is, the more influence the objectives
will have on the policy update step. Since the per-objective
critics are learned in parallel with the policy, setting k
too high tends to destabilize learning, because early on in
training, when the critics produce unreliable Q-values, their
influence on the policy will lead it in the wrong direction.
On the other hand, if k is set too low, then it slows down
learning, because the per-objective action distribution is
only allowed to deviate by a tiny amount from the current
policy, and the updated policy is obtained via supervised
learning on the combination of these action distributions.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization
Humanoid run

Condition

policy network
layer sizes
take tanh of action mean?
minimum variance

(400, 400, 300)
no
10−8

critic network(s)
layer sizes
take tanh of action?

(500, 500, 400)
no

MPO
KL-constraint on policy mean, βµ
KL-constraint on policy covariance, βΣ
training
Adam learning rate
Adam 

Humanoid run (one seed per setting)
scalarized MPO wtask = 1 − wpenalty
wpenalty ∈ linspace(0, 0.15, 100)
MO-MPO
task = 0.1
penalty ∈ linspace(10−6 , 0.15, 100)
Humanoid run, normal vs. scaled (three seeds per setting)

5×10−3
10−6

scalarized MPO wtask = 1 − wpenalty
wpenalty ∈ {0.01, 0.05, 0.1}
MO-MPO
task = 0.1
penalty ∈ {0.01, 0.05, 0.1}

2×10−4
10−8

Shadow Hand touch and turn (three seeds per setting)

Shadow Hand
MPO
actions sampled per state
default 

Settings

30
0.01

scalarized MPO wtask = 1 − wpenalty
wpenalty ∈ linspace(0, 0.9, 10)
MO-MPO
task = 0.01
penalty ∈ linspace(0.001, 0.015, 15)
Shadow Hand orient (ten seeds per setting)
scalarized MPO wtouch = wheight = worientation = 1/3
MO-MPO
touch = height = orientation = 0.01

Sawyer
MPO
actions sampled per state

15

training
target network update period

100

Table 3. Hyperparameters for humanoid, Shadow Hand, and
Sawyer experiments that differ from the defaults in Table 2.

Eventually the learning will converge to more or less the
same policy though, as long as k is not set too high.
Unequal Preference. When there is a difference in preferences across objectives, the relative scale of k is what
matters. The more the relative scale of k is compared to l ,
the more influence objective k has over the policy update,
compared to objective l. And in the extreme case, when
l is near-zero for objective l, then objective l will have
no influence on the policy update and will effectively be
ignored. We explored this briefly in Sec. 5.1 and Fig. 4.
One common example of unequal preferences is when we
would like an agent to complete a task, while minimizing other objectives—e.g., an action norm penalty, “pain”
penalty, or wrist force-torque penalty, in our experiments.
In this case, the  for the task objective should be higher
than that for the other objectives, to incentivize the agent to
prioritize actually doing the task. If the  for the penalties
is too high, then the agent will care more about minimizing the penalty (which can typically be achieved by simply
taking no actions) rather than doing the task, which is not
particularly useful.
The scale of k has a similar effect as in the equal preference

Table 4. Settings for k and weights. (linspace(x, y, z) denotes a
set of z evenly-spaced values between x and y.)

case. If the scale of k is too high or too low, then the same
issues arise as discussed for equal preferences. If all k
increase or decrease in scale by the same (moderate) factor,
and thus their relative scales remain the same, then typically
they will converge to more or less the same policy. This
can be seen in Fig. 5 (right), in the Deep Sea Treasure
domain: regardless of whether time is 0.01, 0.02, or 0.05,
the relationship between the relative scale of treasure and
time to the treasure that the policy converges to selecting is
essentially the same.
A.2. Deep Sea Treasure
In order to handle discrete actions, we make several minor adjustments to scalarized MPO and MO-MPO. The
policy returns a categorical distribution, rather than a Gaussian. The policy is parametrized by a neural network, which
outputs a vector of logits (i.e., unnormalized log probabilities) of size |A|. The KL constraint on the change of this
policy, β, is 0.001. The input to the critic network is the
state concatenated with a four-dimensional one-hot vector
denoting which action is chosen (e.g., the up action corresponds to [1, 0, 0, 0]> ). Critics are trained with one-step
temporal-difference error, with a discount of 0.999. Other
than these changes, the network architectures and the MPO
and training hyperparameters are the same as in Table 2.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization
Humanoid Mocap
Scalarized VMPO
KL-constraint on policy mean, βµ
0.1
KL-constraint on policy covariance, βΣ 10−5
default 
0.1
initial temperature η
1
Training
Adam learning rate
10−4
batch size
128
unroll length (for n-step return, Sec. D.1) 32

0.7
8.2
11.5
14.0 15.1 16.1

19.6 20.3
22.4

Table 5. Hyperparameters for the humanoid mocap experiments.

A.3. Humanoid Mocap
For the humanoid mocap experiments, we used the following architecture for both MO-VMPO and VMPO: for the
policy, we process a concatentation of the mocap reference
observations and the proprioceptive observations by a two
layer MLP with 1024 hidden units per layer. This reference
encoder is followed by linear layers to produce the mean
and log standard deviation of a stochastic latent variable.
These latent variables are then concatenated with the proprioceptive observations and processed by another two layer
MLP with 1024 hidden units per layer, to produce the action
distribution. For VMPO, we use a three layer MLP with
1024 hidden units per layer as the critic. For MO-VMPO
we use a shared two layer MLP with 1024 hidden units per
layer followed by a one layer MLP with 1024 hidden units
per layer per objective. In both cases we use k-step returns
to train the critic with a discount factor of 0.95. Table 5
shows additional hyperparameters used in our experiments.

B. Experimental Domains
We evaluated our approach on one discrete domain (Deep
Sea Treasure), three simulated continuous control domains
(humanoid, Shadow Hand, and humanoid mocap), and one
real-world continuous control domain (Sawyer robot). Here
we provide more detail about these domains and the objectives used in each task.
B.1. Deep Sea Treasure
Deep Sea Treasure (DST) is a 11×10 grid-world domain,
the state space S consists of the x and y position of the agent
and the action space A is {up, right, down, left}. The
layout of the environment and values of the treasures are
shown in Fig. 8. If the action would cause the agent to
collide with the sea floor or go out of bounds, it has no
effect. Farther-away treasures have higher values. The
episode terminates when the agent collects a treasure, or
after 200 timesteps.

23.7

Figure 8. Deep Sea Treasure environment from Vamplew et al.
(2011), with weights from Yang et al. (2019). Treasures are labeled
with their respective values. The agent can move around freely
in the white squares, but cannot enter the black squares (i.e., the
ocean floor).

There are two objectives, time penalty and treasure value.
A time penalty of −1 is given at each time step. The agent
receives the value of the treasure it picks up as the reward
for the treasure objective. In other words, when the agent
picks up a treasure of value v, the reward vector is [−1, v];
otherwise it is [−1, 0].
B.2. Shadow Hand
Our robot platform is a simulated Shadow Dexterous Hand
(Shadow Robot Company, 2020) in the MuJoCo physics
engine (Todorov et al., 2012). The Shadow Hand has five
fingers and 24 degrees of freedom, actuated by 20 motors.
The observation consists of joint angles, joint velocities, and
touch sensors, for a total of 63 dimensions. Each fingertip
of our Shadow Hand has a 4×4 spatial touch sensor. This
sensor has three channels, measuring the normal force and
the x and y-axis tangential forces, for a sensor dimension of
4×4×3 per fingertip. We simplify this sensor by summing
across spatial dimensions, resulting in a 1×1×3 observation
per fingertip.
In the touch task, there is a block in the environment that is
always fixed in the same pose. In the turn task, there is a dial
in the environment that can be rotated, and it is initialized to
a random position between −30◦ and 30◦ . The target angle
of the dial is 0◦ . The angle of the dial is included in the
agent’s observation. In the orient task, the robot interacts
with a rectangular peg in the environment; the initial and
target pose of the peg remains the same across episodes.
The pose of the block is included in the agent’s observation,
encoded as the xyz positions of four corners of the block
(based on how Levine et al. (2016) encodes end-effector
pose).

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

height objective

orientation objective

reward

1

0
6.75

pain penalty

Figure 9. These images show what task completion looks like for
the touch, turn, and orient Shadow Hand tasks (from left to right).

7.00
zpeg

7.25 0

2
d(θ, θpeg )

0
Figure 11. In the orient Shadow Hand task, the height and orientation objectives have shaped rewards, as plotted here.

−2
−4
−6

B.2.2. A LIGNED O BJECTIVES
0

2

4
impact force

6

Figure 10. In the touch and turn Shadow Hand tasks, the pain
penalty is computed based on the impact force, as plotted here. For
low impact forces, the pain penalty is near-zero. For high impact
forces, the pain penalty is equal to the negative of the impact force.

B.2.1. BALANCING TASK C OMPLETION AND PAIN
In the touch and turn tasks, there are two objectives, “pain”
penalty and task completion. A sparse task completion reward of 1 is given for pressing a block with greater than 5N
of force or turning a dial to a fixed target angle, respectively.
In both tasks, the episode terminates when the agent completes the task; i.e., the agent gets a total reward of either
0 or 1 for the task completion objective per episode. The
Pareto plots for these two tasks in the main paper (Fig. 6)
show the discounted task reward (with a discount factor of
γ = 0.99), to capture how long it takes agents to complete
the task.
The “pain” penalty is computed as in (Huang et al., 2019). It
is based on the impact force m(s, s0 ), which is the increase
in force from state s to the next state s0 . In our tasks, this is
measured by a touch sensor on the block or dial. The pain
penalty is equal to the negative of the impact force, scaled
by how unacceptable it is:


rpain (s, a, s0 ) = − 1 − aλ (m(s, s0 )) m(s, s0 ) ,

(6)

where aλ (·) ∈ [0, 1] computes the acceptability of an impact
force. aλ (·) should be a monotonically decreasing function,
that captures how resilient the robot and the environment
are to impacts. As in (Huang et al., 2019), we use
aλ (m) = sigmoid(λ1 (−m + λ2 )) ,

(7)

with λ = [2, 2]> . The relationship between pain penalty
and impact force is plotted in Fig. 10.

In the orient task, there are three non-competing objectives:
touching the peg, lifting the peg to a target height, and orienting the peg to be perpendicular to the ground. The target
z position and orientation is shown by the gray transparent
peg (Fig. 9, right-most); note that the x and y position is
not specified, so the robot in the figure gets the maximum
reward with respect to all three objectives.
The touch objective has a sparse reward of 1 for activating the peg’s touch sensor, and zero otherwise. For the
height objective, the target z position is 7cm above the
ground; the peg’s z position is computed with respect to
its center of mass. The shaped reward for this objective
is 1 − tanh(50|ztarget − zpeg |). For the orientation objective, since the peg is symmetrical, there are eight possible
orientations that are equally valid. The acceptable target
orientations Qtarget and the peg’s orientation qpeg are denoted
as quaternions. The shaped reward is computed with respect
to the closest target quaternion, as
min 1 − tanh(2∗ d(q, qpeg )) ,

q∈Qtarget

where d(·) denotes the `2-norm of the axis-angle equivalent
(in radians) for the distance between the two quaternions.
Fig. 11 shows the shaping of the height and orientation
rewards.
B.3. Humanoid
We make use of the humanoid run task from Tassa et al.
(2018).9 The observation dimension is 67 and the action
dimension is 21. Actions are joint accelerations with minimum and maximum limits of −1 and 1, respectively. For
this task there are two objectives:
• The original task reward given by the environment. The
goal is is to achieve a horizontal speed of 10 meters per
second, in any direction. This reward is shaped: it is
equal to min(h/10, 1) where h is in meters per second.
For this objective we learn a Q-function.
9

This task is available at github.com/deepmind/dm control.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

• Limiting energy usage, by penalizing taking highmagnitude actions. The penalty is the `2-norm of the
action vector, i.e, rpenalty (a) = −kak2 . For this objective, we do not learn a Q-function. Instead, we
compute this penalty directly to evaluate a given action
in a state-independent way during policy optimization.
B.4. Humanoid Mocap
The motion capture tracking task used in this paper was
developed as part of a concurrent submission (Anonymous,
2020) and does not constitute a contribution of this paper.
We use a simulated humanoid adapted from the “CMU
humanoid” available at dm control/locomotion (Merel et al.,
2019). We adjusted various body and actuator parameters
to be more comparable to that of an average human. This
humanoid has 56 degrees of freedom and the observation is
1021-dimensional.
This motion capture tracking task is broadly similar to previous work on motion capture tracking (Chentanez et al., 2018;
Peng et al., 2018; Merel et al., 2019). The task is associated
with an underlying set of motion capture clips. For this
paper we used roughly 40 minutes of locomotion motion
capture clips from the CMU motion capture database.10

third reward component is based on the difference in endeffector positions:

2
rapp = exp −40kpapp − pref
,
app k
where papp and pref
app are the end effector positions of the
simulated humanoid and the mocap reference, respectively.
The fourth reward component is based on the difference in
joint orientations:

ref 2
rquat = exp −2kqquat  qquat
k ,
ref
where  denotes quaternion differences and qquat and qquat
are the joint quaternions of the simulated humanoid and the
mocap reference, respectively.

Finally, the last reward component is based on difference in
the joint angles and the Euclidean positions of a set of 13
body parts:
:=ε

z
}|
{
1
ref
rtrunc = 1 −
(kbpos − bref
k
+
kq
−
q
k
pos
pos 1
pos 1 ),
0.3
where bpos and bref
pos correspond to the body positions of the
simulated character and the mocap reference and qpos , and
ref
qpos
correspond to the joint angles.

At the beginning of a new episode, we select a frame uniformly at random from all frames in the underlying mocap
data (excluding the last 10 frames of each clip). The simulated humanoid is then initialized to the pose of the selected
frame.

We include an early termination condition in our task that is
linked to this last reward term. We terminate the episode if
ε > 0.3, which ensures that rtrunc ∈ [0, 1].

The observations in this environment are various proprioceptive observations about the current state of the body as well
as the relative target positions and orientations of 13 different body parts in the humanoid’s local frame. We provide
the agent with the target poses for the next 5 timesteps.

r=

The choice of reward function is crucial for motion capture
tracking tasks. Here we consider five different reward components, each capturing a different aspect of the similarity
of the pose between the simulated humanoid and the mocap
target. Four of our reward components were initially proposed by Peng et al. (2018). The first reward component is
based on the difference in the center of mass:

2
rcom = exp −10kpcom − pref
,
com k
where pcom and pref
com are the positions of the center of mass
of the simulated humanoid and the mocap reference, respectively. The second reward component is based on the
difference in joint angle velocities:

ref 2
rvel = exp −0.1kqvel − qvel
k ,
ref
where qvel and qvel
are the joint angle velocities of the simulated humanoid and the mocap reference, respectively. The
10

This database is available at mocap.cs.cmu.edu.

In our MO-VMPO experiments, we treat each reward component as a separate objective. In our VMPO experiments,
we use a reward of the form:
1
1
rtrunc + (0.1rcom + λrvel + 0.15rapp + 0.65rquat ) ,
2
2
(8)

varying λ as described in the main paper (Sec. 6.3).
B.5. Sawyer
The Sawyer peg-in-hole setup consists of a Rethink Robotics
Sawyer robot arm. The robot has 7 joints driven by series
elastic actuators. On the wrist, a Robotiq FT 300 forcetorque sensor is mounted, followed by a Robotiq 2F85 parallel gripper. We implement a 3D end-effector Cartesian
velocity controller that maintains a fixed orientation of the
gripper. The agent controls the Cartesian velocity setpoints.
The gripper is not actuated in this setup. The observations
provided are the joint positions, velocities, and torques, the
end-effector pose, the wrist force-torque measurements, and
the joint velocity command output of the Cartesian controller. We augment each observation with the two previous
observations as a history.
In each episode, the peg is initalized randomly within an
8×8×8 cm workspace (with the peg outside of the hole).

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

The environment is then run at 20 Hz for 600 steps. The
action limits are ±0.05 m/s on each axis. If the magnitude
of the wrist force-torque measurements exceeds 15 N on
any horizontal axis (x and y axis) or 5 N on the vertical axis
(z axis), the episode is terminated early.

(10)

We use an asynchronous actor-learner setup, in which actors regularly fetch policy parameters from the learner and
act in the environment, writing these transitions to the replay buffer. We refer to this policy as the behavior policy
throughout the paper. The learner uses the transitions in
the replay buffer to update the (online) Q-functions and the
policy. Please see Algorithms 2 and 3 for more details on
the actor and learner processes, respectively.

(11)

Algorithm 2 MO-MPO: Asynchronous Actor

(12)

1: given (N) reward functions {rk (s, a)}N
k=1 , T steps per

There are two objectives: the task itself (inserting the peg),
and minimizing wrist force measurements.
The reward for the task objective is defined as


rinsertion = max 0.2rapproach , rinserted
peg

rapproach = s(p

opening

,p

)

bottom
rinserted = raligned s(ppeg
)
z , pz
peg
opening
raligned = pxy − pxy
< d/2

(9)

where ppeg is the peg position, popening the position of the
hole opening, pbottom the bottom position of the hole and d
the diameter of the hole.
s(p1 , p2 ) is a shaping operator
√
atanh( l)
s(p1 , p2 ) = 1 − tanh (
kp1 − p2 k2 ) ,

2

(13)

which gives a reward of 1 − l if p1 and p2 are at a Euclidean
distance of . Here we chose lapproach = 0.95, approach =
0.01, linserted = 0.5, and inserted = 0.04. Intentionally, 0.04
corresponds to the length of the peg such that rinserted = 0.5
if ppeg = popening . As a result, if the peg is in the approach
position, rinserted is dominant over rapproach in rinsertion .
Intuitively, there is a shaped reward for aligning the peg
with a magnitude of 0.2. After accurate alignment within
a horizontal tolerance, the overall reward is dominated by
a vertical shaped reward component for insertion. The horizontal tolerance threshold ensures that the agent is not
encouraged to try to insert the peg from the side.
The reward for the secondary objective, minimizing wrist
force measurements, is defined as
rforce = −kF k1 ,

parameters from the online network. Online networks are
updated using gradient descent in each learning iteration.
Note that in the main paper, we refer to the target policy
network as the old policy, πold .

(14)

where F = (Fx , Fy , Fz ) are the forces measured by the
wrist sensor.

C. Algorithmic Details
C.1. General Algorithm Description
We maintain one online network and one target network for
each Q-function associated to objective k, with parameters
denoted by φk and φ0k , respectively. We also maintain one
online network and one target network for the policy, with
parameters denoted by θ and θ0 , respectively. Target networks are updated every fixed number of steps by copying

episode

2: repeat
3:
Fetch current policy parameters θ from learner
4:
// Collect trajectory from environment
5:
τ = {}
6:
for t = 0, . . . , T do
7:
at ∼ πθ (·|st )
8:
// Execute action and determine rewards
9:
r = [r1 (st , at ), . . . , rN (st , at )]
10:
τ ← τ ∪ {(st , at , r, πθ (at |st ))}
11:
end for
12:
Send trajectory τ to replay buffer
13: until end of training

C.2. Retrace for Multi-Objective Policy Evaluation
Recall that the goal of the policy evaluation stage (Sec. 4.1)
is to learn the Q-function Qφk (s, a) for each objective k,
parametrized by φk . These Q-functions are with respect
to the policy πold . We emphasize that it is valid to use any
off-the-shelf Q-learning algorithm, such as TD(0) (Sutton,
1988), to learn these Q-functions. We choose to use Retrace
(Munos et al., 2016), described here.
Given a replay buffer D containing trajectory snippets
τ = {(s0 , a0 , r 0 , s1 ), . . . , (sT , aT , r T , sT +1 )}, where r t
denotes a reward vector {rk (st , at )}N
k=1 that consists of a
scalar reward for each of N objectives, the Retrace objective
is as follows:
h
i
2
min Eτ ∼D Qret
,
(15)
k (st , at ) − Q̂φk (st , at ))
φk

with
Qret
k (st , at ) = Q̂φ0k (st , at ) +

T
X

γ j−t

j
 Y

j=t
j

z=t+1

δ = rk (sj , aj ) + γV (sj+1 ) − Q̂φ0k (sj , aj ) ,
V (sj+1 ) = Eπold (a|sj+1 ) [Q̂φ0k (sj+1 , a)] .


cz δ j ,

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

Algorithm 3 MO-MPO: Asynchronous Learner
1: given batch size (L), number of actions (M), (N) Q-functions,
(N) preferences {k }N
k=1 , policy networks, and replay buffer
D
2: initialize Lagrangians {ηk }N
k=1 and ν, target networks, and
online networks such that πθ0 = πθ and Qφ0k = Qφk
3: repeat
4: repeat
L,M,N
5:
// Collect dataset {si , aij , Qij
, where
k }i,j,k
ij
i
ij
i
6:
// s ∼ D, a ∼ πθ0 (a|s ), and Qk = Qφk 0 (si , aij )
7:
8:
// Compute action distribution for each objective
9:
for k = 1, . . . , N do

 ij 
P 1
PM 1
Qk
δηk ← ∇ηk ηk k + ηk L
log
exp
10:
i L
j M
ηk
11:

Update ηk based on δηk
ij

12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:

Q

qkij ∝ exp( ηkk )
end for

optimization:
πnew = argmax
θ

Z
s.t.
s

N Z
X

Z
µ(s)

s

k=1

qk (a|s) log πθ (a|s) da ds
a

µ(s) KL(πold (a|s) k πθ (a|s)) ds < β . (16)

We first write the generalized Lagrangian equation, i.e.
Z
N Z
X
L(θ, ν) =
µ(s) qk (a|s) log πθ (a|s) da ds (17)
s

k=1

a



+ν β−

Z
s


µ(s) KL(πold (a|s) k πθ (a|s)) ds ,

where ν is the Lagrangian multiplier. Now we solve the
following primal problem,
max min L(θ, ν) .

// Update parametric policy with trust region
// sg denotes a stop-gradient
P PM PN ij
ij i
δπ ← −∇θ L
j
k qk log πθ (a |s )
i

PL
+sg(ν) β − i KL(πθ0 (a|si ) k πθ (a|si )) ds


P
i
i
0 (a|s ) k πsg(θ) (a|s )) ds
δν ← ∇ν ν β− L
KL(π
θ
i
Update πθ based on δπ
Update ν based on δν

19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
// Update Q-functions
24:
for k = 1, . . . , N do
2
P
25:
δφk ← ∇φk (st ,at )∈τ ∼D Q̂φk (st , at ) − Qret
k
26:
with Qret
k as in Eq. 15
27:
Update φk based on δφk
28:
end for
29:
30:
until fixed number of steps
31:
// Update target networks
32:
πθ0 = πθ , Qφk 0 = Qφk
33: until convergence

The importance weights ck are defined as


πold (az |sz )
cz = min 1,
,
b(az |sz )
where b(az |sz ) denotes the behavior policy used to collect
 Q trajectories
 in the environment. When j = t, we set
j
c
z=t+1 z = 1.
We also make use of a target network for each Q-function
(Mnih et al., 2015), parametrized by φ0k , which we copy
from the online network φk after a fixed number of gradient
steps on the Retrace objective (15).
C.3. Policy Fitting
Recall that fitting the policy in the policy improvement
stage (Sec. 4.2.2) requires solving the following constrained

θ

ν>0

To obtain the parameters θ for the updated policy, we solve
for ν and θ by alternating between 1) fixing ν to its current
value and optimizing for θ, and 2) fixing θ to its current
value and optimizing for ν. This can be applied for any
policy output distribution.
For Gaussian policies, we decouple the update rules to optimize for mean and covariance independently, as in (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018b). This allows for setting different
KL bounds for the mean (βµ ) and covariance (βΣ ), which
results in more stable learning. To do this, we first separate
out the following two policies for mean and covariance,


πθµ (a|s) = N a; µθ (s), Σθold (s) ,
(18)


πθΣ (a|s) = N a; µθold (s), Σθ (s) .
(19)
Policy πθµ (a|s) takes the mean from the online policy network and covariance from the target policy network, and
policy πθΣ (a|s) takes the mean from the target policy network and covariance from online policy network. Now our
optimization problem has the following form:

max

N Z
X

θ

s

Z
µ(s)
a



qk (a|s) log πθµ (a|s)πθΣ (a|s) da ds

Z k=1
s.t. µ(s) KL(πold (a|s) k πθµ (a|s)) ds < βµ
Zs
µ(s) KL(πold (a|s) k πθΣ (a|s)) ds < βΣ .

(20)

s

As in (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018b), we set a much smaller
bound for covariance than for mean, to keep the exploration
and avoid premature convergence. We can solve this optimization problem using the same general procedure as
described above.

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

C.4. Derivation of Dual Function for η
Recall that obtaining the per-objective improved action distributions qk (a|s) in the policy improvement stage (Sec.
4.2.1) requires solving a convex dual function for the temperature ηk for each objective. For the derivation of this
dual function, please refer to Appendix D.2 of the original
MPO paper (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018b).

D. MO-V-MPO: Multi-Objective On-Policy
MPO
In this section we describe how MO-MPO can be adapted
to the on-policy case, in which a state-value function V (s)
is learned and used to estimate the advantages for each
objective. We call this approach MO-V-MPO.
D.1. Multi-objective policy evaluation in the on-policy
setting
In the on-policy setting, to evaluate the previous policy
πold , we use advantages A(s, a) estimated from a learned
state-value function V (s), instead of a state-action value
function Q(s, a) as in the main text. We train a separate
V -function for each objective by regressing to the standard n-step return (Sutton, 1988) associated with each objective. More concretely, given trajectory snippets τ =
{(s0 , a0 , r 0 ), . . . , (sT , aT , r T )} where r t denotes a reward
vector {rk (st , at )}N
k=1 that consists of rewards for all N objectives, we find value function parameters φk by optimizing
the following objective:
min
φ1:k

N
X
k=1

h
Eτ

i
(T )
Gk (st , at ) − Vφπkold (st ))2 .

(21)

(T )

Here Gk (st , at ) is the T -step target for value function
k, which uses the actual rewards in the trajectory and
bootstraps from the current value function for the rest:
PT −1
(T )
Gk (st , at ) = `=t γ `−t rk (s` , a` ) + γ T −t Vφπkold (s`+T ).
The advantages are then estimated as Aπk old (st , at ) =
(T )
Gk (st , at ) − Vφπkold (st ).
D.2. Multi-objective policy improvement in the
on-policy setting
Given the previous policy πold (a|s) and estimated advantages {Aπk old (s, a)}k=1,...,N associated with this policy for
each objective, our goal is to improve the previous policy.
To this end, we first learn an improved variational distribution qk (s, a) for each objective, and then combine and distill
the variational distributions into a new parametric policy
πnew (a|s). Unlike in MO-MPO, for MO-V-MPO we use the
joint distribution qk (s, a) rather than local policies qk (a|s)
because, without a learned Q-function, only one action per
state is available for learning. This is a multi-objective vari-

ant of the two-step policy improvement procedure employed
by V-MPO (Song et al., 2020).
D.2.1. O BTAINING IMPROVED VARIATIONAL
DISTRIBUTIONS PER OBJECTIVE (S TEP 1)
In order to obtain the improved variational distributions
qk (s, a), we optimize the RL objective for each objective
Ak :
Z
max
qk (s, a) Ak (s, a) da ds
(22)
qk

s,a

s.t. KL(qk (s, a)kpold (s, a)) < k ,
where the KL-divergence is computed over all (s, a), k denotes the allowed expected KL divergence, and pold (s, a) =
µ(s)πold (a|s) is the state-action distribution associated with
πold .
As in MO-MPO, we use these k to define the preferences
over objectives. More concretely, k defines the allowed contribution of objective k to the change of the policy. Therefore, the larger a particular k is with respect to others, the
more that objective k is preferred. On the other hand, if
k = 0 is zero, then objective k will have no contribution to
the change of the policy and will effectively be ignored.
Equation (22) can be solved in closed form:
 A (s, a) 
k
qk (s, a) ∝ pold (s, a) exp
,
ηk

(23)

where the temperature ηk is computed based on the constraint k by solving the following convex dual problem

ηk = argmin ηk k +
(24)
ηk

Z
 A (s, a) 
k
ηk log
pold (s, a) exp
da ds .
η
s,a
We can perform the optimization along with the loss by
taking a gradient descent step on ηk , and we initialize with
the solution found in the previous policy iteration step. Since
ηk must be positive, we use a projection operator after each
gradient step to maintain ηk > 0.
Top-k advantages. As in Song et al. (2020), in practice
we used the samples corresponding to the top 50% of advantages in each batch of data.
D.2.2. F ITTING A NEW PARAMETRIC POLICY (S TEP 2)
We next want to combine and distill the state-action distributions obtained in the previous step into a single parametric
policy πnew (a|s) that favors all of the objectives according
to the preferences specified by k . For this we solve a supervised learning problem that fits a parametric policy as
follows:

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

πnew = argmax
θ

Z
s.t.
s

N Z
X
k=1

stays close to the target policy during each policy improvement step, to improve stability of learning (Sec. E.2).
qk (s, a) log πθ (a|s) da ds

s,a

KL(πold (a|s) k πθ (a|s)) ds < β ,

(25)

where θ are the parameters of our function approximator
(a neural network), which we initialize from the weights of
the previous policy πold , and the KL constraint enforces a
trust region of size β that limits the overall change in the
parametric policy, to improve stability of learning. As in
MPO, the KL constraint in this step has a regularization
effect that prevents the policy from overfitting to the local
policies and therefore avoids premature convergence.

We use the standard expectation-maximization
(EM) algoPN
rithm to efficiently maximize k=1 log pθ (Rk = 1). The
EM algorithm repeatedly constructs a tight lower bound in
the E-step, given the previous estimate of θ (which corresponds to the target policy in our case), and then optimizes
that lower bound in the M-step. We introduce a variational
distribution qk (s, a) per objective, and use this to decomPN
pose the log-evidence k=1 log pθ (Rk = 1) as follows:
N
X

log pθ (Rk = 1)

=

In order to optimize Equation (25), we employ Lagrangian
relaxation similar to the one employed for ordinary VMPO (Song et al., 2020).

N
X
k=1
N
X
k=1

E. Multi-Objective Policy Improvement as
Inference

We assume there are observable binary improvement events,
{Rk }N
k=1 , for each objective. Rk = 1 indicates that our
policy has improved for objective k, while Rk = 0 indicates
that it has not. Now we ask, if the policy has improved with
respect to all objectives, i.e., {Rk = 1}N
k=1 , what would the
parameters θ of that improved policy be? More concretely,
this is equivalent to the maximum a posteriori estimate for
{Rk = 1}N
k=1 :
θ

(26)

where the probability of improvement events depends on θ.
Assuming independence between improvement events Rk
and using log probabilities leads to the following objective:
max
θ

N
X

KL(qk (s, a) k pθ (s, a|Rk = 1)) −
KL(qk (s, a) k pθ (Rk = 1, s, a)) .

The second term of this decomposition is expanded as:

In the main paper, we motivated the multi-objective policy
update rules from an intuitive perspective. In this section, we
show that our multi-objective policy improvement algorithm
can also be derived from the RL-as-inference perspective. In
the policy improvement stage, we assume that a Q-function
for each objective is given, and we would like to improve
our policy with respect to these Q-functions. The derivation here extends the derivation for the policy improvement
algorithm in (single-objective) MPO in Abdolmaleki et al.
(2018a) (in appendix) to the multi-objective case.

max pθ (R1 = 1, R2 = 1, . . . , RN = 1) p(θ) ,

(28)

k=1

N
X
k=1

KL(qk (s, a) k pθ (Rk = 1, s, a))
=

N
X
k=1

=

N
X
k=1

(29)

h
pθ (Rk = 1, s, a) i
Eqk (s,a) log
qk (s, a)
h
p(Rk = 1|s, a)πθ (a|s)µ(s) i
Eqk (s,a) log
,
qk (s, a)

where µ(s) is the stationary state distribution, which is assumed to be given in each policy improvement step. In
practice, µ(s) is approximated by the distribution of the
states in the replay buffer. p(Rk = 1|s, a) is the likelihood
of the improvement event for objective k, if our policy chose
action a in state s.
The first term of the decomposition in Equation (28) is
always positive, soPthe second term is a lower bound on
N
the log-evidence
k=1 log pθ (Rk = 1). πθ (a|s) and
qk (s,a)
qk (a|s) = µ(s) are unknown, even though µ(s) is given.
In the E-step, we estimate qk (a|s) for each objective k by
minimizing the first term, given θ = θ 0 (the parameters of
the target policy). Then in the M-step, we find a new θ by
fitting the parametric policy to the distributions from first
step.
E.1. E-Step

log pθ (Rk = 1) + log p(θ) .

(27)

k=1

The prior distribution over parameters, p(θ), is fixed during
the policy improvement step. We set the prior such that πθ

The E-step corresponds to the first step of policy improvement in the main paper (Sec. 4.2.1). In the E-step, we
choose the variational distributions {qk (a|s)}N
k=1 such that
PN
the lower bound on k=1 log pθ (Rk = 1) is as tight as

A Distributional View on Multi-Objective Policy Optimization

possible when θ = θ 0 , the parameters of the target policy.
The lower bound is tight when the first term of the decomposition in Equation (28) is zero, so we choose qk to minimize
this term. We can optimize for each variational distribution
qk independently:
h
i
qk (a|s) = argmin Eµ(s) KL(q(a|s) k pθ0 (s, a|Rk = 1))
q
h
= argmin Eµ(s) KL(q(a|s) k πθ0 (a|s)) −
q
i
Eq(a|s) log p(Rk = 1|s, a)) .
(30)
We can solve this optimization problem in closed form,
which gives us

qk (a|s) = R

πθ0 (a|s) p(Rk = 1|s, a)
.
πθ0 (a|s) p(Rk = 1|s, a) da

This solution weighs the actions based on their relative
improvement likelihood p(Rk = 1|s, a) for each objective.
We define the likelihood of an improvement event Rk as
p(Rk = 1|s, a) ∝ exp

 Q (s, a) 
k

αk

,

where αk is an objective-dependent temperature parameter
that controls how greedy the solution qk (a|s) is with respect
to its associated objective Qk (s, a). For example, given a
batch of state-action pairs, at the extremes, an αk of zero
would give all probability to the state-action pair with the
maximum Q-value, while an αk of positive infinity would
give the same probability to all state-action pairs. In order
to automatically optimize for αk , we plug the exponential
transformation into (30), which leads to
Z
Z
qk (a|s) = argmax µ(s) q(a|s)Qk (s, a) da ds−
q
Z
αk µ(s) KL(q(a|s) k πθ0 (a|s)) ds . (31)
If we instead enforce the bound on KL divergence as a hard
constraint (which we do in practice), that leads to:
Z
Z
qk (a|s) = argmax µ(s) q(a|s)Qk (s, a) da ds (32)
q
Z
s.t. µ(s) KL(q(a|s) k πθ0 (a|s)) ds < k ,
where, as described in the main paper, the parameter k
defines preferences over objectives. If we now assume that
qk (a|s) is a non-parametric sample-based distribution as in
(Abdolmaleki et al., 2018b), we can solve this constrained

optimization problem in closed form for each sampled state
s, by setting
q(a|s) ∝ πθ0 (a|s) exp

 Q (s, a) 
k

ηk

,

(33)

where ηk is computed by solving the following convex dual
function:
ηk = argmin ηk +
(34)
η
Z
Z
 Q (s, a) 
k
η µ(s) log πθ0 (a|s) exp
da ds .
η
Equations (32), (33), and (34) are equivalent to those given
for the first step of multi-objective policy improvement in
the main paper (Sec. 4.2.1). Please see refer to Appendix
D.2 in (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018b) for details on derivation
of the dual function.
E.2. M-Step
After obtaining the variational distributions qk (a|s) for
each
lower bound for
PN objective k, we have found a tight
0
log
p
(R
=
1)
when
θ
=
θ
.
We
can now obtain
θ
k
k=1
the parameters θ of the updated policy πθ (a|s) by optimizing this lower bound. After rearranging and dropping the
terms in (27) that do not involve θ, we obtain
θ ∗ = argmax
θ

N Z
X

Z
µ(s)

qk (a|s) log πθ (a|s) da ds

k=1

+ log p(θ).
This corresponds to the supervised learning step of policy
improvement in the main paper (Sec. 4.2.2).
For the prior p(θ) on the parameters θ, we enforce that the
new policy πθ (a|s) is close to the target policy πθ0 (a|s).
We therefore optimize for
θ ∗ = argmax
θ

Z
s.t.

N Z
X

Z
µ(s)

qk (a|s) log πθ (a|s) da ds

k=1

µ(s) KL(πθ0 (a|s) k πθ (a|s)) ds < β.

Because of the constraint on the change of the parametric
policy, we do not greedily optimize the M-step objective.
See (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018b) for more details.

