Journal Title
XX(X):1–29
©The Author(s) 2023
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned
www.sagepub.com/

Navigating the Wild: Pareto-Optimal
Visual Decision-Making in Image Space

SAGE

Durgakant Pushp , Weizhe Chen , Zheng Chen , Chaomin Luo , Jason M. Gregory3 , and
Lantao Liu1

arXiv:2511.07750v1 [cs.RO] 11 Nov 2025

1

1

1

2

Abstract
Navigating complex real-world environments requires understanding the semantic context and effectively making
decisions. Existing solutions leave room for improvements: traditional reactive approaches that do not maintain a map
often struggle in complex environments, map-dependent methods demand significant effort in mapping processes,
and learning-based methods rely on large training datasets and face the difficulty of generalization. To address
these challenges, we propose a novel visual semantic navigation framework that combines data-driven semantic
understanding, Pareto-optimal decision-making, and image-space planning. Our approach uses a local environmental
representation called navigability image, which allows the robot to assess immediate traversability without relying
on apriori mapping or navigation data. Building on this, we introduce Pareto-Optimal Visual Navigation (POVNav),
a decision-making framework in the image space that identifies appropriate sub-goals, constructs collision-free
paths, and generates control commands using visual servoing. This framework also supports selective navigation
behaviors, such as avoiding traversable yet slippery grasslands to prevent getting stuck, by dynamically adjusting
the navigability criteria within the local representation. POVNav is lightweight, operating solely with a monocular
camera and without requiring map storage or training data collection, making it highly versatile for different robotic
platforms and environments. Extensive year-round real-world experiments validated its efficacy in both structured
indoor environments and unstructured outdoor settings, including dense forest trails and snow-covered roads. Field
experiments using various image segmentation techniques demonstrated its robustness and adaptability across a wide
range of conditions. Additionally, we demonstrate that POVNav sucessfully guides a robot through narrow pipes in a
culvert inspection task. Overall, we showcase the utility of POVNav in real-world scenarios, highlighting its flexibility and
computational efficiency for autonomous robots in complex environments.
Keywords
Navigation in the Wild, Visual Semantic Navigation, Pareto-Optimal Decision-Making

1

Introduction

Humans possess a remarkable ability to navigate complex
environments by intuitively interpreting visual scenes at
a semantic level – effortlessly distinguishing between
walkable paths, obstacles, and hazardous areas while
adapting to diverse terrain conditions (Dwivedi et al. 2024).
This natural ability to understand both the semantic meaning
and traversability of environmental elements has inspired
the development of visual semantic navigation systems for
autonomous robots. Through semantic segmentation of the
environment, robots can identify traversable spaces and
obstacles, moving closer to achieving human-like navigation
capabilities in challenging real-world applications. A
motivating scenario is shown in Figure 1.
Visual semantic navigation is especially crucial in field
robotics applications. For instance, in disaster response
scenarios such as radiation accidents or search-and-rescue
operations after devastating earthquakes, robots must quickly
differentiate between safe terrain and hazardous areas,
including fires and unstable structures (Wellhausen et al.
2020). Agricultural robots need to differentiate between crop
rows and traversable paths covered with leaves and weeds,
enabling efficient farmland navigation while preventing crop
Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]

damage (Sivakumar et al. 2021). In marine environments,
underwater robots must identify safe passages through coral
reefs while maintaining stable navigation – simultaneously
focusing on scientifically relevant features and avoiding
disturbance to sensitive ecosystems (Koreitem et al. 2020).
In recent years, visual semantic navigation has witnessed
significant advancements, with a wide range of approaches
proposed to address the challenges of autonomous navigation
in complex environments. These approaches can be
broadly categorized into two main ideas: modular and
end-to-end approaches, each with distinct strengths and
limitations. Modular methods are the classic or symbolic
approaches that decompose the navigation task into
separate modules, often including semantic Simultaneous

1 D. Pushp, W. Chen, Z. Chen and L. Liu are with Luddy
School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47408, USA. Email: dpushp@iu.edu
2 C. Luo is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Mississippi State University, MS 39762, USA.
3 J. Gregory is with DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, USA.

Corresponding author:
Lantao Liu
Email: lantao@iu.edu

2

Journal Title XX(X)

Goal
Water
Water
Grass

Mud

Figure 1. A motivating example of visual semantic navigation in the wild. Visual semantic navigation enables the robot to interpret
the semantic meaning of environmental elements and adapt its path to diverse terrain conditions. The green path represents the
shortest route, passing through mud and water, while the yellow path avoids these non-traversable areas. On the right panels, from
top to bottom, appear the observed image, segmented image, and a planning image illustrating a semantically-aware, safe path.

Localization and Mapping (SLAM), planning, and control.
This modularity enhances system interpretability and allows
for targeted improvements within each component. However,
maintaining an accurate map in modular approaches can be
expensive in terms of computation and storage. On the other
hand, end-to-end methods bypass explicit mapping by using
deep neural networks to directly transform raw sensor data
into control commands, enabling fast and reactive decisionmaking. Although end-to-end methods reduce mapping
overhead, they often lack interpretability and struggle to
generalize well in unseen environments.
Deploying these approaches in the wild presents additional
challenges. Outdoor environments are characterized by
high variability and complexity, such as fluctuating
lighting, changing weather, and diverse terrain, which can
significantly impact system performance. Modular systems
may find it costly to continuously update (semantic) maps
which change constantly in dynamic environments, while
end-to-end systems may fail to adapt effectively to unseen
scenarios or sensor noise. These challenges highlight the
need for a hybrid approach that enjoys the interpretability
and modularity of modular systems and the adaptability and
efficiency of end-to-end systems, combining the best of both
worlds to achieve robust and efficient navigation in the wild.
To this end, we propose a novel framework for visual
semantic navigation that leverages the strengths of both modular and end-to-end approaches. To maintain interpretability
and modularity, the proposed framework still comprises
separate modules for perception, planning, and control,
allowing for easy integration of new algorithms in each
component, e.g., advanced segmentation models (Kirillov
et al. 2023) or reasoning traversability by Vision Language
Models (VLMs) (Song et al. 2024). Instead of depending
on explicit semantic mapping, we adopt an approach that
Prepared using sagej.cls

directly utilizes image observations to guide navigation decisions, aligning with end-to-end methodologies.
Without a semantic map, traditional planning algorithms
cannot be directly applied, since they require a global bird’seye view representation of the environment. The challenge
then becomes how to plan and control a robot using only
ego-centric image. A straightforward solution is to segment
the image into navigable and non-navigable regions, plan a
path through the navigable regions from the robot’s current
position to the projected goal in the image, and control the
robot to follow this path using visual servoing. However, this
approach has two challenges:
• Segmentation Noise: real-world segmentation images
are typically noisy and incomplete, leading to
suboptimal paths and control actions.
• Goal Occlusion: When the goal is occluded (e.g.,
behind a tree), there does not exist a collision-free path
connecting the robot to the goal in the image space.
To address the first challenge, we observe that segmentation accuracy exhibits an inverse relationship with depth, i.e,
objects in close proximity yield more reliable segmentation
results compared to distant scenes. Since distant objects typically have minimal impact on immediate navigation decisions, we introduce the concept of visual horizon that marks
the boundary of reliably navigable regions in the robot’s
vicinity. By constraining our analysis to the space within this
visual horizon, we mitigate the effects of segmentation noise
and incompleteness.
The second challenge can be addressed by selecting a
subgoal in the image. Effective subgoal selection must
balance multiple potentially competing criteria: (1) the
subgoal must be reachable via an obstacle-free path; (2)
reduce the distance to the final goal; and (3) allow sufficient
deviation to navigate around obstacles when necessary. The
proposed framework employs Pareto-optimality to analyze

Pushp et al.

the trade-offs among these objectives, hence the name
Pareto-Optimal Visual Navigation (POVNav).
Intuitively, POVNav first generates a navigability image
from the semantic segmented image, focusing on the space
within the visual horizon. After projecting the goal onto the
navigability image, POVNav selects a subgoal on the visual
horizon that balances goal-reaching and obstacle avoidance.
A simple and efficient planning algorithm then generates
a safe visual path from the robot’s current position to the
subgoal, which is then followed using visual servoing. The
advantages of POVNav are multi-fold:
• Modularity: The proposed framework maintains the
interpretability and modularity of traditional modular
systems, allowing for easy integration of various
advanced algorithms in each component.
• Efficiency: By directly processing image observations, POVNav avoids the overhead of maintaining
an explicit map, enabling fast and reactive decisionmaking.
• Robustness: The concept of the visual horizon mitigates the effects of segmentation noise and incompleteness, enhancing the robustness of navigation decisions.
• Adaptability: By selecting subgoals on the visual
horizon, POVNav can effectively navigate in dynamic
environments with occluded goals, adapting to
different scenarios.
This paper extends our prior conference publication
(Pushp et al. 2023) by substantially enriching the framework,
analysis, and evaluation of POVNav. The main contributions
of this journal version are:
• A comprehensive literature review situates POVNav
within the broader context of vision-based navigation,
highlighting its unique formulation that combines
semantic segmentation, image-space planning, and
Pareto-optimal decision-making.
• New theoretical analysis is introduced, including
proofs of weak Pareto-optimality, control stability, and
computational complexity of the overall framework.
• Additional experimental results are provided through
extensive simulations and long-duration field trials
across diverse indoor and outdoor environments using
multiple robot platforms.
• Systematic ablation and robustness studies isolate the
impact of key components and validate the method’s
generalizability under varying environmental and
perceptual conditions.
• Expanded discussion of implementation details offers
practical insights into segmentation model integration,
parameter tuning, and real-time deployment strategies
for resource-constrained systems.
Experimental results from comparing the proposed
framework against representative baseline methods reveal
that, the proposed approach achieves a significantly higher
success rate across diverse environments, ranging from
sparsely populated areas to densely cluttered obstacle
configurations. Moreover, POVNav consistently identifies
and follows shorter paths. We also present real-world field
trials to show the robustness and adaptability of the proposed
Prepared using sagej.cls

3

framework, highlighting its potential to navigate through
various challenging scenarios. Last but not least, we release
the code to facilitate future research.

2

Related Work

Our work aligns with robust visual semantic navigation
approaches, which generally fall into two main categories: non-learning-based methods, such as optical flow,
appearance-based tracking, and object feature tracking; and
learning-based solutions. In the following sections, we
review key advancements in each of these areas, examining their contributions and limitations within the context
of autonomous navigation. Additionally, as our proposed
framework relies heavily on segmentation techniques to
interpret and navigate environments, we discuss various
semantic segmentation methods, highlighting how their differing outputs can impact navigational performance.

2.1

Feature-Based Visual Navigation

Visual features are crucial in enabling robots to interpret and
interact with their surroundings. Optical flow, as a widelyused visual feature, plays a significant role in obstacle
avoidance and visual navigation. A comprehensive review
of optical flow methods is provided by Liu et al. (1998).
Giachetti et al. (1998) introduced a method for achieving
dense and reliable optical flow from images captured by a
car-mounted camera in outdoor environments. By employing
correlation-based techniques and shock compensation, they
estimated egomotion, including speed and angular velocity,
through analysis of flow patterns on flat roads. This optical
flow approach also facilitated coarse segmentation, allowing
for the differentiation of moving objects and enhancing the
localization of motion boundaries. These findings highlight
the potential of optical flow in vision systems for vehicle
navigation and driver assistance applications.
Song and Huang (2001) combines correlation-based and
differential techniques to achieve faster real-time estimation.
Optical flow has since been widely applied in moving
object detection (Talukder and Matthies 2004; Braillon et al.
2006) and for mobile robot navigation within constrained
environments (McCarthy and Bames 2004). Ohnishi and
Imiya (2006) applied optical flow to detect dominant planes
— a critical element in path planning. Furthermore, optical
flow algorithms have demonstrated significant potential for
real-time UAV navigation across a range of tasks (Yamada
et al. 2003; Rondon et al. 2009; Conroy et al. 2009;
Mammarella et al. 2008; Janschek et al. 2006). Specifically,
Zingg et al. (2010) developed a wall collision avoidance
technique utilizing a depth map derived from optical flow on
images captured by onboard cameras.
The growing popularity of optical flow has spurred
developments in both hardware and open-source solutions,
such as the optical flow sensor designed by Honegger et al.
(2013), which integrates a machine vision CMOS image
sensor and has been demonstrated in-flight on a micro air
vehicle. Over the past decade, research has increasingly
focused on refining optical flow feature estimation through
diverse methods (Zhai et al. 2021; Hui et al. 2018; Ilg
et al. 2017, 2018; Ren et al. 2017; Wulff and Black
2015; Bailer et al. 2015; Ranjan and Black 2017), leading

4

Journal Title XX(X)

to notable improvements in visual navigation. However,
relatively few studies have examined the integration of
optical flow into motion planning and control. Recent
works that address this gap include Ponce et al. (2018);
Károly et al. (2019); Meronen et al. (2020); Argus et al.
(2020); de Croon et al. (2021); Boretti et al. (2022),
highlighting the emerging interest in leveraging optical flow
for comprehensive navigation and control in robotics. In
general, optical flow-based methods are effective for obstacle
avoidance as long as they can detect sufficient features.
However, they lack the ability to perform goal-oriented
navigation and adaptive behavior.
While optical flow has remained a popular feature for
visual navigation over the past decades, previous research
has also explored alternative approaches, including stored
image templates (Bista et al. 2016; Hong et al. 1992;
van der Zwaan et al. 2002; Chang et al. 2010; Mielle
et al. 2016; Courbon et al. 2008; Menegatti et al. 2004;
Franz and Mallot 2000; Srinivasan et al. 1999; Jayender
et al. 2008), information-theoretic approach (Dame and
Marchand 2011; Vakil et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2021; Carlone
and Karaman 2018; Soundararajan and Bovik 2013) and
feature tracking-based navigation methods (Anand et al.
2019; Srivastava et al. 2021; Pushp et al. 2022; Jia et al.
2009; Wang et al. 2021; Zhao and Pei 2013; Mateus
et al. 2005; Zhang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2023) to control
robot motion. An image segmentation approach based on
sub-region growing to determine paths is proposed by
Zhang et al. (2008), where control parameters are derived
from path boundary information. Although these methods
provide solutions for obstacle avoidance, they fall short in
facilitating goal-directed navigation. Achieving visual, goaloriented navigation poses unique challenges, as existing
techniques struggle to relate 3D goal locations to the
observable image features, particularly when the goal lies
outside the camera’s field of view. A notable prior work
that explores a related direction is Otte et al. (2009), which
proposed planning directly in image space using disparitybased representations to generate paths without relying on
global maps. While this work demonstrated the feasibility
of image-space planning and local obstacle avoidance,
it did not account for non-navigability arising from
semantic understanding and focused solely on geometric
cues derived from depth information. In contrast, our
proposed framework incorporates semantic information to
reason about navigability, and identifies an optimal sub-goal
within the current observation, effectively bridging the gap
between image-space features and goal-directed behavior.
Unlike previous methods, our approach provides a unified
framework for navigation in unknown environments, relying
solely on a monocular camera and a directional cue toward
the goal.

2.2

Learning-Based Visual Navigation

A large family of current frameworks is data-driven or based
on machine learning (Shen et al. 2019; Bansal et al. 2020).
For example, imitation learning-based approaches have been
broadly explored to train a navigation policy that enables
a robot to mimic human behaviors or navigate closely to
certain waypoints without a prior map (Manderson et al.
2020; Hirose et al. 2021; Pan et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020;
Prepared using sagej.cls

Yan et al. 2022; Karnan et al. 2022). A large amount
of work on visual navigation can also be found in the
computer vision community (Chaplot et al. 2020b; Lei et al.
2024; Kwon et al. 2023; Wasserman et al. 2023; Kim
et al. 2023; Hahn et al. 2021; Kwon et al. 2021; Li and
Košecka 2020; Chaplot et al. 2020b; Liu and Okatani 2022;
Chaplot et al. 2020a). These approaches exploit and integrate
deep learning methods to train navigation policies that
perform remarkably well when provided sufficient training
data, but can fail if no or very limited data is available.
In contrast to the data-driven approaches, we introduce a
computationally light but effective planning and control loop
that decouples the representation from the behavior learning
(like modular learning approaches) using segmentationbased visual representation. Our solution is more flexible,
robust, and adaptable to a variety of navigation missions
since it makes no assumption about the data it needs to learn
the policy.

2.3

Visual Semantic Segmentation

Semantic segmentation assigns a unique human-defined
semantic label to each pixel in an image, providing
detailed scene understanding essential for applications like
navigation. Our proposed method, POVNav, leverages pretrained segmentation models to parse navigability and uses
image-space planning for action generation. The overall
performance of POVNav is closely tied to the predictive
accuracy of the employed segmentation models.
The advent of deep neural networks, particularly Fully
Convolutional Networks (FCNs) (Long et al. 2015), significantly improved semantic segmentation performance
by using convolutional neural networks to predict pixelwise classifications. Subsequent works have enhanced
FCNs through various techniques, such as multi-scale feature aggregation using different kernel sizes and dilation
rates (Chen et al. 2017a,b; Yu and Koltun 2015), multiresolution input generation via image pyramids (Zhao et al.
2017), probabilistic graph-based smoothing (Liu et al.
2017), and encoder-decoder structures for feature compensation (Ronneberger et al. 2015). Recently, Transformerbased models (Vaswani et al. 2017; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020;
Ranftl et al. 2021) have gained prominence in semantic
segmentation. Transformers utilize attention mechanisms to
model long-range dependencies among pixels. Methods such
as Zheng et al. (2021) treat semantic segmentation as a
sequence-to-sequence prediction task, encoding images as
patch sequences. SegFormer (Xie et al. 2021) combines a
hierarchical Transformer encoder with a lightweight MLP
decoder to create a robust yet efficient segmentation framework. A novel architecture for image segmentation (Cheng
et al. 2022) incorporates masked attention, which extracts
localized features by constraining cross-attention within predicted mask regions. These methods are particularly suited
for applications like POVNav, as they allow online correction
of navigable and non-navigable class definitions, addressing domain shifts effectively. However, field experiments
revealed significant performance degradation when there is a
substantial difference between the training and testing data,
highlighting their limitations under extreme domain shifts.
To address domain adaptation challenges, transfer learning
frameworks have been widely explored. Techniques such

Pushp et al.

5
Table 1. Notation System.

Table 2. Mathematical Symbols.

Meaning

Example

Remark

Symbol

Meaning

variable
constant
vector
matrix
set or space
function
functional
special PDF
definition
transpose
absolute value
Euclidean norm

x
X
x
X
R
f(·)
E(·)
N
≜
⊺
m
|·|
∥·∥2

lower-case
upper-case
bold, lower-case
bold, upper-case
blackboard, upper-case
typewriter
typewriter, upper-case
calligraphy, upper-case

E
t
st
pt
xt
yt
θt
It
H
W
at
vt
ωt
g
xg
yg
Ot
π
f(·, ·)
d(·, ·)
Dsafe
Vmax
Ωmax
∆Vmax
∆Ωmax
T
ε
Iseg
Inav
H
G
c
cnav
cexp
w
ξ
λ
ϕ

environment
time step
robot’s state
robot’s position
x-coordinate of the robot
y-coordinate of the robot
heading angle of the robot
image captured by the robot
height of the image
width of the image
robot’s action
linear velocity of the robot
angular velocity of the robot
goal position
x-coordinate of the goal
y-coordinate of the goal
non-navigable areas
policy
transition function
distance function
safety distance
maximum linear velocity
maximum angular velocity
maximum linear acceleration
maximum angular acceleration
time to reach the goal
goal region radius
segmented image
navigability image
visual horizon pixels
subgoal search space
cost vector
navigation cost
exploration cost
weight parameter
safe visual path
min distance to visual horizon
angular deviation from safe path

as adversarial training (Ganin et al. 2016; Hoffman et al.
2016, 2018; Chen et al. 2022; Saito et al. 2018; Luo et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2023c; Khan et al.
2025) align data distributions between source and target
domains, while self-training methods (Zou et al. 2018; Mei
et al. 2020; Hoyer et al. 2021; Zou et al. 2019; Xie et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2019; Hoyer et al. 2022b,a; Chen et al.
2023b) iteratively refine predictions on target domain data,
demonstrating robustness in real-world scenarios.
For our proposed POVNav framework, we experimented
with various semantic segmentation techniques, including
Transformer-based and domain-adaptive methods, to evaluate their impact on navigation performance. Field experiments revealed that while state-of-the-art segmentation models generally enhance navigability predictions, they may fail
under significant domain shifts. To mitigate this, POVNav
dynamically adjusts navigable and non-navigable class definitions online, improving adaptability across diverse environments. Our findings highlight the critical role of segmentation accuracy in achieving reliable and efficient navigation.

3

Background

In this section, we introduce the assumptions, problem
formulation, and notation system used in this work. Table 1
summarizes the notation system, and Table 2 lists the
mathematical symbols used in this paper.

3.1

Assumptions

In this work, we make some reasonable assumptions to
simplify the problem and focus on the core challenges of
visual navigation.
Assumption 1. Relative Position Estimation. The robot
can estimate its relative direction to the goal. This can be
achieved by using practical methods such as visual data
interpretation, odometry, or a combination of visual inputs
with inertial and/or GPS signals (if available) for improved
accuracy.
Assumption 2. Camera Calibration. Without loss of
generality, a monocular RGB camera is calibrated and
centered at the robot’s position.
Assumption 3. Velocity Control. The robot’s motion can be
controlled through velocity commands.
Prepared using sagej.cls

Assumption 4. Reasonable Obstacle Speeds. The dynamic
obstacles move at speeds that allow for reactive navigation.

3.2

Problem Formulation

Consider a mobile robot operating in an unknown
environment E ⊂ R2 where dynamic obstacles are present.
The robot’s state at time t is defined by its pose st ≜
[xt , yt , θt ], where pt ≜ [xt , yt ] represents the position in the
2D plane (or locally approximated 2D surface), and θt ∈
[−π, π) denotes the heading angle. The robot’s observation
space consists of RGB images captured by an onboard
camera, i.e., It ∈ RH×W ×3 , where H and W are the
height and width of the image, respectively. The actions or
control commands that the robot can execute at = [vt , ωt ]
are defined by the linear velocity vt and angular velocity ωt .
Given a goal position g = [xg , yg ] ∈ E specified in the
robot’s initial coordinate frame, the objective is to move to
the goal efficiently while avoiding non-navigable areas.
Definition 1. Non-Navigable Areas. Non-navigable areas
Ot are defined as regions where the robot cannot traverse
due to obstacles, safety constraints, physical limitations, or
other user-defined criteria for selective navigation.

6

Journal Title XX(X)

Observed Image

Perception

Upper Visual Horizon

Goal Direction

Navigable and
Non-Navigable Class
Definition

Visual Path Planning
Visual
Horizon

Navigability Image
Lower Visual Horizon

Segmented Image

Visual Path

Visual Servo Control

Figure 2. System Diagram of the Proposed Framework. The system diagram illustrates the framework’s operational flow. The
robot’s observation consists of an RGB image, which is processed by the perception module to generate a segmented image using
semantic segmentation. Based on the robot’s traversability capabilities, navigable and non-navigable classes are defined. Utilizing
this definition of navigability, a visual horizon is created to produce a navigability image. The robot then plans a visual path on this
navigability image and employs visual servoing to navigate through the environment.

The visual navigation problem can be formulated as
finding a policy π, mapping the visual observation to control
commands:
at = π(It ).
(1)
The robot’s motion is subject to the following constraints:
st+1 = f(st , at ),
d(st , Ot ) ≥ Dsafe ,

(Motion Constraint)
(Safety Constraint)

|vt | ≤ Vmax ,

(Linear Velocity Bound)

|ωt | ≤ Ωmax ,

(Angular Velocity Bound)

|vt − vt−1 | ≤ ∆Vmax ,

(Linear Acceleration Bound)

|ωt − ωt−1 | ≤ ∆Ωmax ,

(Angular Acceleration Bound)

where f(·, ·) represents the unknown transition function
related to the robot’s dynamics, kinematics, and the
environment, d(st , Ot ) is the distance to the nearest nonnavigable area, and other terms are self-explanatory.
The objective is to minimize the expected time to reach
the goal while satisfying the above constraints:
min E[T ]
π

s.t.

∥pT − g∥2 ≤ ε,

(2)

where T is the time to reach the goal and ϵ is the acceptable
goal region radius. When the robot’s velocity is bounded,
the time to reach the goal is a function of the path length
and the robot’s velocity profile; many existing works focus
on optimizing the path length (Anderson et al. 2018). To
simplify the notation, we will omit the time index t in the
following sections unless necessary.

4

Methodology

In this section, we present a comprehensive framework for
mapless visual navigation that enables robots to navigate
efficiently in unknown environments using only camera
input. Our approach combines semantic segmentation,
horizon-based planning, and visual servoing to achieve
robust navigation performance without relying on prior maps
or explicit 3D reconstruction.
Prepared using sagej.cls

4.1

Framework Overview

The proposed framework, POVNav, consists of two main
components: a navigability image and a visual planner.
The navigability image offers a simple and efficient
representation of the intricate real-world environment. The
visual planner addresses the competing navigation objectives
by initially identifying a Pareto-optimal visual subgoal. The
subsequent utilization of visual path planning facilitates
the generation of navigation features that drives the robot
through visual servoing, as depicted in Figure 2. We describe
these critical modules in this section.

4.2

Segmentation Algorithms

To segment navigable regions in indoor environments, we
adopt a self-developed surface normal-based segmentation
method. For outdoor scenarios, we utilize the state-of-theart semantic segmentation framework Mask2Former (Cheng
et al. 2022). This section details the surface normal-based
approach used for generating navigability images from depth
data.
Let Idepth
∈ RH×W denote the depth image at time t,
t
where each pixel value Idepth
(i, j) represents the depth
t
measurement at image coordinates (i, j). We assume that the
depth image corresponds to a continuous 3D scene in the
real world. To compute the surface normal at a given pixel,
we locally approximate the surface as a triangle using three
adjacent points: Idepth
(i, j), Idepth
(i − 1, j), and Idepth
(i, j −
t
t
t
1). The corresponding 3D points are used to compute the
surface normal via the cross product:


depth
→
−
n i,j = Idepth
(i,
j)
−
I
(i
−
1,
j)
t
t


depth
× It (i, j) − Idepth
(i, j − 1) .
(3)
t
We then normalize this vector to obtain the unit surface
normal:
→
−
n i,j
.
(4)
n
bi,j = →
−
∥ n i,j ∥

Pushp et al.

7

Goal

0

Start

Figure 3. The planning image and its corresponding input image
are shown. The reference frame is fixed at the bottom center
whose x-axis is shown by red arrow and y -axis is shown by
green arrow.

The set of all unit normals defines a surface normal image
∈ RH×W ×3 . To construct the binary navigability map
Inorm
t
nav
It ∈ {0, 1}H×W , we use a geometric heuristic: a pixel is
considered navigable if its normal vector points upward (i.e.,
aligned with the world z-axis):
(
Inav
t (i, j) =

0, if n
bi,j ≈ (0, 0, 1)
1, otherwise

(5)

Here, 0 denotes navigable (i.e., ground) and 1 denotes nonnavigable areas. In practice, a tolerance threshold is used to
allow slight deviations from the exact vertical orientation due
to surface irregularities and sensor noise.
Post-processing is applied to refine the segmentation:
small navigable regions completely enclosed by nonnavigable areas are reclassified as non-navigable, as they
are unreachable. Additionally, any regions occluded behind
non-navigable structures are also treated as non-navigable to
ensure safe operation. This method is lightweight, runs in
real-time, and provides a robust geometric prior for ground
segmentation in structured indoor environments.
Segmenting outdoor unstructured environments requires
advanced methods. Transformer-based approaches have
gained popularity, and we adopt Mask2Former (Cheng et al.
2022) for this purpose due to its excellent performance.
Additional technical details can be found in the original
paper.

4.3

Start and Goal in Image Space

In traditional robot navigation, planning occurs in real-world
coordinates using a predefined map. However, our problem
is different: the robot only knows the relative position of its
goal (with respect to its current position) and must navigate
without a map, planning its path directly in the image space.
A key challenge in image-space planning is determining the
start and goal positions in the image.
The start position is typically chosen as the robot’s current
position. However, in the image space, the robot’s current
position is not directly observable. Computing the robot’s
current pose in the image is challenging due to the lack of
visual cues. To simplify this process, we assume the robot’s
current position is at the bottom-center pixel of the firstperson-view image, as shown in Figure 3. This simplification
is reasonable for a robot with a fixed camera setup that
satisfies Assumption 2.
Prepared using sagej.cls

(a) Forward Goal

(b) Backward Goal

Figure 4. Illustration of the goal angle mapping on the image
border. (a) Visualizes the mapping of goals located in front of
the robot, corresponding to angles [−π/2, π/2], onto the left,
top, and right borders of the image. Blue circles indicate sample
POG points for the goal directions at −π/2, 0, and π/2, with the
green circle denoting the robot’s current position. The two arrows
illustrate example mappings for representative goal directions
located to the left and right of the robot’s heading. (b) Illustrates
how goals located behind the robot, with angles in (π/2, π] and
(−π/2, −π), are projected onto an extended virtual border and
then re-mapped to the bottom edge using a dashed projection.
Black circles represent virtual goal locations, while blue circles
denote actual goal projections.

When the goal lies within the camera’s field of view,
we can compute its corresponding pixel location by
transforming the relative goal position to image space, using
parameters obtained during camera calibration. However,
when the goal is outside the field of view, we must identify
a surrogate goal in the image. To do so, we transform
the relative goal direction (with Assumption 1) in the
real-world to the image border as they are the farthest
observable pixels in the image. Specifically, we treat the
bottom-center pixel (i.e., the start) as the origin of the
image space, with the x-axis pointing upwards and the yaxis pointing to the left. To map goal angles to border
pixels, we connect each border pixel to the origin with a
line segment and calculate its angle relative to the x-axis.
Through this mapping, angles in the range [−π/2, 0), 0, and
(0, π/2] correspond to pixels along the right, up, and left
borders of the image as shown in Figure 4(a). Note that
the goal directions are defined with respect to the image’s
vertical axis (x-axis as shown in Figure 3). Figure 4(b)
illustrates the mapping of the remaining goal angles. Since
the angles in the range (π/2, −π/2] must all be mapped to a
single available border—the bottom border, we mirror the
left, top, and right borders with respect to the bottom edge.
Using this mirrored structure, we apply the same mapping
strategy to determine the surrogate goals for each pixel
along the extended (virtual) border. However, because these
virtual borders do not physically exist in the image, the
corresponding points are projected back onto the real bottom
border, as shown by the dashed arrows in Figure 4(b).
Interestingly, all goal directions lying on the mirrored left
and right virtual borders (highlighted by the blue lines in
the Figure 4(b)) are projected to a single pixel each: the
bottom-left corner for the left virtual border and the bottomright corner for the right virtual border. While this creates
a temporary saturation of surrogate goals at these corners,
it does not impact navigation. As the robot rotates to align

8

Journal Title XX(X)

with the goal direction, these angles gradually move into
the visible region, updating their projections accordingly. We
refer to this border-based surrogate goal as the Peripheral
Optic Goal (POG). It is worth mentionting that, although
this is a practical and effective mapping, alternative strategies
could also be considered depending on the application
context.

4.4

Navigability Image

After defining the start and goal in the image space, we
construct a navigability image that indicates the navigable
and non-navigable pixels in the image, which can be used
for image-space planning.
Definition 2. Navigability Image. A navigability image
W ×H
Inav ∈ {0, 1}
is a binary image that represents the
navigable and non-navigable areas in the image space.
One way to generate the navigability image is to use
an off-the-shelf segmentation algorithm to classify each
pixel into semantic classes. Specifically, at each time step,
the segmentation model can take the observed image I ∈
RH×W ×3 as the input and return a segmented image Iseg ∈
RH×W ×C , where C is the number of segmentic classes.
Based on the robot’s specifications (e.g., dimensions, tire
traction, motor power), a navigability function is defined
to classify each semantic class as navigable (denoted by
0) or non-navigable (denoted by 1). This function can
also be learned from data collected during robot’s past
operation. Examples of navigable classes include grass, trail,
and asphalt, while non-navigable classes include sky, tree,
and building. The navigability image Inav is then obtained
by applying the navigability function to each pixel in the
segmented image Iseg .
A straightforward idea is to run some path planning
algorithms directly on the navigability image. However,
planning on the navigability image can be challenging and
unnecessary. Segmentation results obtained from real-world
images are noisy, which can lead to incorrect navigability
classification, especially in the upper part of the image
where things are far away and appear small. Some scattered
navigable spots in the mostly non-navigable region can
mislead optimization-based planners to generate suboptimal
or even infeasible paths. On the other hand, non-navigable
spots in the mostly navigable region increase the difficulty
of sampling-based planners. Due to this reason, sometimes
there is no feasible path that connects the start and goal
pixels within the navigable region. On top of that, spending
computational resources on planning a complex path in the
far-away region is unnecessary since it does not significantly
affect the robot’s immediate navigation decisions but only
provides a rough direction to the goal.

4.5

Visual Horizon

To simplify the planning problem, we introduce the concept
of visual horizon Figure 5. Intuitively, the visual horizon
delineates the maximum extent of the navigable region
surrounding the robot. By focusing on the region within the
horizon, we can simplify the planning problem and more
confidently generate a path that is traversable by the robot.
Prepared using sagej.cls

Figure 5. An illustration of the raw and processed navigability
image.

Definition 3. Visual Horizon. The visual horizon H is a set
of contiguous pixels of the navigability image Inav . The upper
boundary of the visual horizon starts from the left border and
ends at the right border such that (a) any pixel below the
horizon is navigable; (b) the pixels on and above the horizon
are non-navigable; and (c) the number of navigable pixels
below the horizon is maximized. In addition, the left and
right image borders below the horizon are also considered
part of the visual horizon.
In practice, the visual horizon boundary can be computed
by scanning the navigability image from left to right. The
basic idea is to initialize the visual horizon to be the bottom
row of the image and “push” each pixel on the horizon
upwards until it reaches a non-navigable pixel. This process
is repeated for each column of the image.
The visual horizon provides a clear and contiguous
boundary for the navigable region surrounding the robot.
Now we can bypass the aforementioned challenges of
planning on the navigability image by planning below the
visual horizon. Noticing that the POG is typically outside the
visual horizon, we need to find a subgoal within the visual
horizon for planning. Since any pixel below the horizon is
navigable, the planning problem degenerates into a naive
problem of drawing a straight line from the start to the POG.
Any point where the line segment connecting the start to the
POG intersects the horizon can serve as a subgoal. However,
this straightforward approach can lead to suboptimal paths
where the robot keeps moving towards obstacles. To address
this issue, we introduce a subgoal selection mechanism.

4.6

Pareto-Optimal Subgoal Selection

Selecting a subgoal is essentially deciding the optimization
criteria for the robot’s immediate navigation decision which
might involve multiple conflicting objectives.
Objective Functions: The naive approach is to
minimize the distance to the goal, yielding a shortest
path. To avoid bumping into obstacles, it also needs
to add another optimization criterion that maximizes the
clearance from obstacles. However, these two objectives are
typically conflicting: moving towards the goal often means
maneuvering closer around obstacles when the goal is behind
an obstacle and thus leads to a collision risk. In addition,
tunning the weights of these two objectives is non-trivial and
can be time-consuming. In many scenarios, the robot may
also get stuck in local minima.
Our insight is that the robot does not need to move directly
towards the goal. Instead, it only needs to move as far as
4.6.1

Pushp et al.

9

possible from the current location while getting closer to the
goal and avoiding non-navigable areas. This insight leads to
the formulation of the subgoal selection problem as a multiobjective optimization problem.
We prioritize the safety of the robot over the other two
objectives, so the traversability objective is not implemented
as an optimization criterion. Instead, we implicitly optimize
the traversability objective by constraining the subgoal to lie
within the visual horizon.
Definition 4. Traversability Objective. The search space of
the subgoal G is constrained to the pixels on or below the
visual horizon such that there exists a path connecting the
start and the subgoal that is entirely within the navigable
region. Formally, for each pixel (x, y) ∈ G,
∀(x, y) ∈ G

∃(x, y ′ ) ∈ H

s.t. y ′ ≥ y.

(6)

Definition 5. Navigation Objective. Given the coordinates
of the peripheral optic goal (xg , yg ), the navigation objective
is to find a subgoal (x, y) ∈ G that minimizes the deviation
cnav of the angle pointing towards the subgoal θs ≜
arctan(y/x) from the goal angle θg ≜ arctan(yg/xg ):
arg min cnav (x, y) = |θs − θg | .

(7)

(x,y)

Since larger distance between two pixels in the image
space corresponds to larger distance of the two locations in
the real world, we can simply use the Euclidean distance
between the subgoal and the start pixel as the exploration
objective formally defined as follows.

Lemma 1. Optimal Subgoal on Visual Horizon. The
subgoal (x⋆ , y ⋆ ) that is Pareto-optimal with respect to the
navigation and exploration objectives must lie on the visual
horizon H.
Proof. This can be proved by contradiction. Assume that
there is a Pareto-optimal subgoal (x⋆ , y ⋆ ) that does not lie on
the visual horizon. Draw a line starting at the robot’s current
position (0, 0) and passing through (x⋆ , y ⋆ ). Since (0, 0)
and (x⋆ , y ⋆ ) are both within the visual horizon, this line
must intersect the visual horizon at some point (x′ , y ′ ). This
point has the same navigation objective value as (x⋆ , y ⋆ )
but a better exploration objective value, dominating (x⋆ , y ⋆ ),
hence contradicting the assumption that (x⋆ , y ⋆ ) is Paretooptimal.
Theorem 1 greatly simplifies subgoal selection by
restricting the search space to the visual horizon H. Since
H can be enumerated efficiently, this bypasses the need
for complex optimization algorithms. We introduce the
term Horizon Optic Goal (HOG) to denote the subgoal
selected from the Pareto-optimal set on the visual horizon,
distinguishing it from the POG (the goal projected to the
image border).
Horizon Optic Goal Selection: The remaining
challenge is to pick a single HOG from the horizon.
We choose a scalarization approach to convert the multiobjective optimization problem into a single-objective
optimization problem by weighting the objectives. The
scalarization function is defined as:
4.6.3

c(x, y) = w1 cnav (x, y) + w2 cexp (x, y),
Definition 6. Exploration Objective. The exploration
objective is to maximize the distance from the current
location (i.e., the origin) to the subgoal (x, y) or equivalently,
to minimize the following cost function:
arg min cexp (x, y) = −∥(x, y)∥2 .

(8)

(x,y)

Optimality and Search Space: These two objectives are often conflicting in nature. Each candidate subgoal
(x, y) is associated with a vector of objective values c.
For example, here we have defined two objectives c ≜
[cnav (x, y), cexp (x, y)], which can be further extended to a
multi-objective optimization problem with more objectives.
Let cd be the d-th element of c.
4.6.2

Definition 7. Pareto Optimal Solutions. A subgoal (x, y)
is better than, or dominating, another subgoal (x′ , y ′ ) if and
only if the following conditions are satisfied:
• Any element of c is not larger than the corresponding
element in c′ : ∀d, cd ≤ c′d ;
• At least one element of c is smaller than the
corresponding element in c′ : ∃d s.t. cd < c′d .
The set of solutions that are not dominated by any other
solutions is called the Pareto-optimal set.
All subgoals in the Pareto-optimal set are equally good in
terms of the objectives and the subgoal should be selected
only from this set.
Prepared using sagej.cls

(9)

where w1 and w2 are the weights for the navigation and
exploration objectives, respectively. The weights can be set
based on the complexity of the environment and/or the
user preferences. For example, if the robot is in a cluttered
environment, the weight for the exploration objective should
be higher to avoid obstacles.
We adopt the scalarization approach because it is simple,
computationally efficient, and provides a clear trade-off
between the two objectives. However, there are two caveats
to be aware of. First, scalariation cannot find all Paretooptimal solutions if the Pareto front is non-convex. In our
case, the HOG only needs to be good enough for the robot
to make the current navigation decision so finding a single
compromised solution efficiently is preferable to exploring
the full trade-off space. Second, if the objectives are not
naturally comparable in scale, the weights w1 and w2 need
to be carefully tuned or the objectives need to be normalized.

4.7

Efficient and Effective Servoing Features

After selecting the HOG, the robot needs to take actions to
move towards this visual subgoal – a process known as visual
servoing (Chaumette and Hutchinson 2006). The robot’s
motion is controlled based on visual features extracted
from the image. The visual features should be informative
enough to guide the robot towards the HOG while driving
defensively to avoid non-navigable areas. Although the HOG
is on the visual horizon of the current image and all pixels
below the horizon are navigable, the robot should not rush

10

Journal Title XX(X)

To ensure that the control commands respect the
physical and operational constraints defined in the problem
formulation (Section 3.2), we explicitly bound the control
inputs as:
v ∈ [−Vmax , Vmax ],

Figure 6. An illustration of a visual path (green line) planned
from the start position (green disc) to the Horizon Optic Goal
(blue disc) with a safe boundary (blue lines) that account for the
size of the robot and a safety margin.

directly towards the HOG because the obstacles can be
dynamic and the segmentation boundaries are noisy. To
address this issue, we propose to generate two features: the
proximity feature and the alignment feature.
The proximity feature measures the distance from the
robot to the closest pixel on the visual horizon.
Definition 8. Proximity Feature. The proximity feature λ is
defined as the minimum Euclidean distance from the robot’s
current position to the visual horizon H:
λ = min ∥(x, y)∥2 .
(x,y)∈H

(10)

The proximity feature is used to control the robot’s linear
velocity. Intuitively, the robot should move faster when the
proximity is large and slow down when the proximity is
small.
The alignment feature measures the deviation of the
robot’s heading direction from the direction pointing towards
a safe path connecting the robot to the HOG. In Figure 6, the
heading direction is represented by the red thick line and the
planned path is represented in the green line.
Definition 9. Alignment Feature. Let ξ be a sequence of
pixels representing a safe path connecting the robot to the
HOG. Draw a circle centered at the robot’s current position
(0, 0) with radius R such that the circle intersects the safe
path ξ at a single pixel (x∗ , y∗ ). The alignment feature ϕ is
defined as the angle between the robot’s heading direction
and the direction pointing towards (x∗ , y∗ ):
 
y∗
.
(11)
ϕ = arctan
x∗
The alignment feature is used to control the robot’s angular
velocity. The robot adjust its heading direction to align with
the safe path.
Consider the robot’s state defined by the proximity feature
λ and alignment feature ϕ. Let λ∗ represent the desired
safe distance from obstacles and ϕ∗ = 0 represent perfect
alignment with the safe path. We propose the following
control law:
v = kv (λ − λ∗ ),
(12)
ω = −kω ϕ,
where v is the linear velocity, ω is the angular velocity, and
kv , kω > 0 are control gains.
Prepared using sagej.cls

ω ∈ [−Ωmax , Ωmax ],

where Vmax and Ωmax denote the platform-specific limits on
linear and angular velocities. These bounds reflect actuation
capabilities, mechanical constraints, and safety requirements
of the robot.
Accordingly, we revise the control law to enforce these
limits using nested min and max operations:
v = max (−Vmax , min (kv (λ − λ∗ ), Vmax )) ,
ω = max (−Ωmax , min (−kω ϕ, Ωmax )) .

(13)

This formulation ensures that the control commands a =
[v, ω] always lie within the feasible set specified in the
problem constraints.
In high-speed or traction-limited scenarios, coupling
between translational and rotational motions may induce
excessive lateral forces. Specifically, the lateral acceleration
incurred during turning is alat = vω, which—combined with
longitudinal acceleration along , must satisfy
q the traction

a2lat + a2long ≤
constraint defined by the friction circle
µg, where µ is the surface friction coefficient and g is
gravitational acceleration. To remain within this constraint,
the translational velocity v can be adaptively modulated
based on the angular velocity ω and estimated surface
traction. While this coupling is not critical in our current
experiments which operate at moderate speeds, the proposed
formulation can be extended to support traction-aware
control for high-speed navigation or uneven terrain where
dynamic feasibility becomes a dominant concern.
To generate the visual path ξ, any efficient path planning
algorithm can be used. We propose a simple algorithm
that generates a path connecting the robot to the HOG
while considering the robot’s size and a safety margin.
The algorithm in Algorithm 1 outlines the detailed process.
Calculating the path in this order ensures feasibility within
a linear time constraint. At each step, a safe distance
is maintained on both sides of the path in image space.
This safe distance is computed by adding a safety margin
to half the robot’s width and converting this value to
image coordinates using the camera’s intrinsic and extrinsic
parameters, which include the current pixel position y,
focal length f , real-world safety margin Rsafety margin , and
camera height from the ground h. A shift direction is then
determined to move the path away from obstacles, ensuring
a safe x-distance on either side of each point along the
y-axis. If no shift direction is found, the algorithm marks
that segment as unsafe and resumes checking lower rows.
This results in either a fully safe path or a partial fallback
trajectory. Note that the shift direction only needs to be
identified once, as moving from the visual horizon or any
navigable point to the starting point guarantees an obstaclefree path in this direction, due to the horizon’s inherent
structure.
Figure 7 illustrates several important edge cases in how
the visual horizon affects planning and control.

Pushp et al.

11

HOG
Shifted
HOG

HOG

HOG

HOG

(a) Normal Situation

(b) Downhill

(c) Uphill

(d) Narrow Passage

Figure 7. Illustration of various scenarios where the visual horizon influences path planning and visual servoing (blue circle shows
the POG and green circle shows the start position in all the subfigures). (a) A typical flat-ground navigation case, where the HOG
lies on the visual horizon, which cleanly separates navigable and non-navigable regions. (b) A downhill navigation scenario, where
the robot sees only navigable terrain, shifting the visual horizon to the image borders and moving the HOG to the POG. (c) An uphill
traversal, where the robot encounters only non-navigable regions, pushing the visual horizon to the bottom border of the image and
relocating the HOG to the start position. (d) A constrained passage case, where a safe path to the HOG cannot be generated due to
a narrow gap. The HOG is shifted to a nearby safe region, resulting in an incomplete path. The horizontal line segments shown here
at the HOG indicate the projected robot footprint in image space, which increases in size as the robot approaches the start position.

Algorithm 1 Visual Path Generation
⋆

⋆

Require: Inav , (x , y )
Ensure: Path ξ and mode
▷ mode ∈ {safe, fallback}
1: Initialize (x, y) ← (x⋆ , y ⋆ )
▷ Start from HOG
2: Set shift direction ← NULL, safe margin ← constant
3: Initialize empty path ξ ← [ ] and mode ← safe
4: while y ≥ 0 do
5:
∆x ← find safe distance in image space(y)
6:
xleft ← x + ∆x
7:
xright ← x − ∆x
8:
if any pixel on [xleft , xright ] is non-navigable then
9:
if shift direction = NULL then
10:
shift direction ←
find shift direction()
11:
if shift direction = NULL then
12:
mode ← fallback
13:
y ←y−1
14:
Shift x towards the start point direction
15:
continue ▷ Skip adding this point and move to
next row
16:
Shift x in the shift direction until all points on
[xleft , xright ] are navigable
Append (x, y) to ξ
y ←y−1
Shift x towards the start point direction
20: Append (0, 0) to ξ
21: R EVERSE(ξ)
22: return ξ, mode
17:
18:
19:

In standard navigation scenarios (Figure 7(a)), the visual
horizon effectively separates navigable and non-navigable
regions in the image. HOG lies on the visual horizon, and
a safe, obstacle-free path from the HOG to the robot’s
current position can be generated. In such cases, Algorithm 1
successfully returns a safe path.
However, real-world especially off-road environments
often introduce more complex scenarios such as steep
terrain or perception noise. For instance, when the robot is
descending a slope (Figure 7(b)), the camera may observe
only navigable terrain. A similar situation may arise due to
Prepared using sagej.cls

misclassification by the segmentation model, which could
label all regions as navigable. In such cases, the HOG is
shifted to coincide with the POG, resembling free-space
navigation. A valid path can still be computed in this case.
Conversely, during uphill traversal (Figure 7(c)), the
camera may observe only non-navigable regions, or the
segmentation model may erroneously classify the entire
image as non-navigable, even when navigating a flat surface.
In such cases, the HOG collapses to the start point, resulting
in a path of zero length. This presents a unique challenge:
the proximity feature drops to zero (triggering a backward
motion), while the alignment feature becomes undefined
due to the lack of a visible path. As a fallback, we align
the robot to the POG to maintain a consistent heading.
However, the robot still perceives itself as being dangerously
close to an obstacle and continues to move backward, which
prevents it from climbing steep slopes. Alternative strategies
such as retaining the last known safe proximity value or
using a fixed fallback proximity could be used, but they
risk causing collisions in ambiguous situations, such as
when the robot is genuinely near an obstacle and cannot
observe any navigable area. This is a key limitation of
the current method (and existing solutions). Addressing it
would require incorporating additional information, such as
camera orientation or fallback policies conditioned on pitch,
potentially through the use of a gimbaled camera system
or dynamic viewpoint adjustment. We plan to investigate
these enhancements in future work to further improve system
robustness.
Another special case arises when the goal lies directly
behind the robot (θ = π). In this case, the start point, HOG,
and POG may coincide, causing the alignment feature to
become ill-defined. To prevent this, we introduce a small
angular bias in the goal projection, ensuring numerical
separation and allowing feature computation.
Finally, Figure 7(d) shows a common off-road scenario in
which thin tree branches or narrow passages obscure parts
of the horizon, making it impossible to generate a fully
safe path. In such cases, the proposed algorithm handles the
failure by producing a fallback path that is partially safe,
guiding the robot through available gaps.

12

4.8

Journal Title XX(X)

Theoretical Analysis

We present theoretical analysis of the POVNav framework
focusing on three key aspects: (1) optimality of the
sub-goal selection, (2) control stability analysis, and (3)
computational complexity analysis.
4.8.1

Optimality Analysis: First, we establish that our

scalarization-based HOG selection approach yields weakly
Pareto-optimal solutions regardless of the convexity of the
objective functions.
Definition 10. Weak Pareto Optimality. A solution (x∗ , y ∗ )
is weakly Pareto-optimal if there does not exist another
feasible solution (x, y) such that:
ci (x, y) < ci (x∗ , y ∗ )

∀i ∈ {1, . . . , M },

The feature dynamics can be expressed using the
interaction matrix L:
  
 
λ̇
L
L12 v
= 11
.
(17)
L21 L22 ω
ϕ̇
Substituting the control law:
V̇ (e) = −kv (λ − λ∗ )2 L11 − kω ϕ2 L22 + cross terms.
(18)
For sufficiently small gains, the cross terms can be
dominated by the diagonal terms. Since linear and angular
velocities have positive correlation with the feature dynamics
L11 , L22 > 0, we have V̇ (e) < 0 for e ̸= 0. Therefore, by
Lyapunov’s direct method, the equilibrium point is locally
asymptotically stable.

where ci are the objective functions and M is the number of
objectives.

4.8.3

Theorem 2. Weak Pareto Optimality of HOG. Let H be
the visual horizon and (x∗ , y ∗ ) be the selected HOG that
minimizes the scalarized objective:

Remark 1. Time Complexity. Given an image of size
W × H, the computational complexity of POVNav for
one navigation step, excluding the segmentation step, is
O(W H).

c(x, y) = w1 cnav (x, y) + w2 cexp (x, y),
∗

Let us analyze each major component:

∗

where w1 , w2 > 0. Then (x , y ) is weakly Pareto-optimal.
∗

∗

Proof. We proceed by contradiction. Assume (x , y ) is not
weakly Pareto-optimal. Then ∃(x′ , y ′ ) ∈ H such that:
c′nav < c∗nav

and

c′exp < c∗exp .

Here, we use the shorthand c′nav ≜ cnav (x′ , y ′ ), c∗nav ≜
cnav (x∗ , y ∗ ), c∗exp = cexp (x∗ , y ∗ ), and c′exp = cexp (x′ , y ′ ).
Since w1 , w2 > 0, we have:
w1 c′nav + w2 c′exp < w1 c∗nav + w2 c∗exp .
This contradicts the assumption that (x∗ , y ∗ ) minimizes
c(x, y). Therefore, (x∗ , y ∗ ) must be weakly Pareto-optimal.
Control Stability Analysis: We now analyze the
stability properties of the proposed visual servoing control
law and establish conditions under which the robot will
converge to its desired state.
4.8.2

Definition 11. Error State. Let e = [λ − λ∗ , ϕ]⊤ be the
error state vector, where λ − λ∗ represents the proximity
error and ϕ represents the alignment error.
Theorem 3. Local Asymptotic Stability.
small gains kv , kω > 0, the control law

For sufficiently

v = kv (λ − λ∗ )
ω = −kω ϕ

(14)

ensures local asymptotic stability of the equilibrium point
e = 0.
Proof. Consider the Lyapunov function candidate:
V (e) =

1
1
(λ − λ∗ )2 + ϕ2 .
2
2

(15)

Taking the time derivative:
V̇ (e) = (λ − λ∗ )λ̇ + ϕϕ̇.
Prepared using sagej.cls

Complexity Analysis

(16)

• Segmentation (External Module): A semantic segmentation model (e.g., (Chen et al. 2022; Cheng et al.
2022) or lightweight rule-based methods) is used to
assign class labels to each pixel. The complexity and
runtime of this module depend on the specific model
used and are considered external to the core POVNav
system.
• Navigability Image Generation: Once semantic segmentation is available, each pixel is classified as navigable or non-navigable using a navigability function
that maps semantic classes to binary labels. This
function may rely on a static lookup table defined
by human input or a dynamic table generated using
an LLM. Importantly, updates to this lookup table
can be performed asynchronously and do not affect
the real-time decision loop of POVNav. The binary
segmentation lookup and visual horizon extraction
together require O(W H).
• Pareto-Optimal Subgoal Selection: This step involves
scanning across the visual horizon to select a subgoal
using scalarized multi-objective optimization, which
takes O(W ).
• Feature Generation: The proximity feature is computed over horizon width (O(W )), and the alignment feature requires selecting a point from the path
(O(H)).
• Control Command Generation: A bounded control law
maps features to velocity commands in constant time,
i.e., O(1).
Since the segmentation method is modular and can be
selected based on hardware constraints, its complexity is not
included in the core complexity of POVNav.
The total complexity is dominated by the navigability
image generation and is O(W H).
Remark 2. Space Complexity.
POVNav is O(W H).

The space complexity of

Pushp et al.

13

The space requirements are:
• Navigability image storage: O(W H)
• Visual horizon storage: O(W )
• Path and feature storage: O(W )
Thus the total space complexity is dominated by the image
storage: O(W H).

4.9

Implementation of our framework requires careful consideration of several practical aspects to ensure robust performance across different environments and scenarios. First,
when projecting the goal to POG, we employ a smooth
mapping function that prevents discontinuities at the image
boundaries. This helps maintain stable robot behavior when
the goal transitions between different regions of the image
border.
For navigability image generation, we utilized various
methods: learning-based algorithms, depth-based surface
normal segmentation, and color-based detection. Of these,
color-based detection is lightweight enough to be implemented on a microcontroller, while depth-based surface
normal segmentation can run on low-end devices like a
Raspberry Pi without GPU support. The learning-based
methods, which require GPU acceleration, are executed on a
portable GPU machine compatible with small robots like the
Jackal and Unitree Go1, as shown in Figure 8. To manage
noisy segmentation, morphological operations are applied to
remove isolated pixels and smooth region boundaries. We
also limit the pixel adjustments to the average of recent
movements, ensuring stability in segmentation outputs.
The weights in the scalarization function are normalized
based on the characteristic scale of each objective.
Specifically, we normalize the navigation objective by
π radians (maximum possible angle difference) and the
exploration objective by the image diagonal length. This
ensures that both objectives contribute meaningfully to the
final decision regardless of image resolution or goal location.
The control gains for linear and angular velocities are
adapted based on the robot’s current state and environment
characteristics. When the proximity feature indicates nearby
obstacles, we reduce the linear velocity gain to promote more
cautious movement. Similarly, the angular velocity gain is
increased when sharp turns are required to follow the planned
path.
The radius R for computing the alignment feature is set
dynamically based on the current proximity feature. We
typically use R = min(λ/2, dmax ), where dmax is a maximum
look-ahead distance. This ensures that the robot maintains
a reasonable planning horizon while avoiding reactionary
behavior in cluttered environments.
To achieve efficient implementation, we use integral
image techniques for computing the proximity feature and
maintain a spatial index of the visual horizon points. All
critical computations are vectorized and optimized for cache
efficiency.

5

(a) Jackal

Implementation Details

(b) Husky

(c) Unitree Go1

Figure 8. Robots used for real-world experiments. The Jackal
robot was used for indoor navigation tasks and culvert inspection
task, the Husky robot for outdoor navigation tasks, and the
Unitree Go1 for both indoor and outdoor tasks.

both simulated and real-world environments, covering
indoor and outdoor settings, structured and unstructured
terrains, and different seasons such as winter and fall.
The method is also tested with various segmentation
techniques, under extreme conditions like after heavy
snowfall at -7°C, forest trails, and long-range navigation
tasks (on the kilometer scale) with different definitions
of traversability. We also evaluate performance at various
times of the day—morning, afternoon, and evening—to test
the robustness of existing semantic segmentation methods
under different lighting conditions and assess POVNav’s
adaptability to segmentation inconsistencies. Details of these
experiments are discussed in the following subsections.

5.1

Experimental Setup

Simulation: To evaluate the proposed method,
we used the Clearpath Jackal robot equipped with an
Intel Realsense camera in the ROS Gazebo simulation
environment. The simulation was run on an Intel Alienware
17 laptop, configured with 32 GB of RAM and an 8 GB
GPU, providing the necessary computational power for
real-time processing. We implemented surface normal-based
segmentation* and used it for all simulation experiments. The
goal direction is determined by using the ground-truth robot
pose and the goal pose in the world frame. This mimics
the scenarios of perfect segmentation or reliable goal pose
estimation.
5.1.1

Real-World: For real-world experiments, we utilized
three different robotic platforms: Clearpath’s Jackal, Husky,
and the Unitree Go1 quadruped as shown in Figure 8.
All robots were equipped with an Intel Realsense D435i
camera for RGB-D sensing and an Intel Realsense T265
for localization (used to estimate the relative goal direction;
this is not the only possible solution, as various other
proprioceptive and exteroceptive sensors such as IMU,
encoder, LiDAR etc can achieve the same objective). An
Intel NUC with 32 GB of RAM and a 6 GB GPU was
used as the processing unit across all platforms. This
consistent hardware configuration ensured uniformity in
performance evaluation across different platforms, allowing
us to isolate the impact of environmental and task
variations on the overall system performance. We use surface
5.1.2

Experiments

In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
approach across a variety of scenarios. These include
Prepared using sagej.cls

∗ https://github.com/Dpushp/depth2surface_normals_

seg

14

Journal Title XX(X)

normal-based segmentation, an unsupervised learning-based
method (Chen et al. 2022) and Masked-attention Mask
Transformer (Mask2Former) (Cheng et al. 2022) for realworld experiments.

5.2

Comparison with Baseline Methods

We evaluate the performance of POVNav against two
baseline methods across diverse simulated environments
and tasks. The evaluation is conducted using key metrics:
success rate, path length, and computation time per action.
These metrics provide a comprehensive assessment of each
method’s efficiency and effectiveness, enabling a detailed
comparison of POVNav’s advantages and limitations
relative to the baselines. The experiments are designed
to rigorously test navigation robustness in both static and
dynamic environments under varying conditions and task
complexities.
Baselines: We compare the proposed POVNav
method with a modified version of the Dynamic Window
Approach (DWA) (Fox et al. 1997), which has been
recently adapted to demonstrate the effectiveness of image
segmentation for robotic navigation tasks (Chen et al. 2022,
2023a). DWA is a widely adopted reactive planning method
that shares navigation behavior similar to our framework.
It restricts the search space to circular trajectories that are
collision-free and reachable within a short time horizon.
The original DWA evaluates multiple trajectories based on
predefined objective functions. In the approach proposed by
Chen et al. (2022, 2023a), motion primitives from DWA are
projected onto the image, using a signed distance field for
evaluation. Depth information is employed to project the
candidate trajectories onto the images, allowing DWA to
assess the proximity of obstacles. For collision checking, we
assume that H represents an obstruction in the environment.
We refer to this adapted method as the Visual Motion
Primitive Planner (VMPP). For a fair comparison, we use
our proposed Navigability Image as the local representation
for this method.
We also compare our method with a sparse optic
flow-based reactive planner that utilizes time-to-transit (τ )
information (Boretti et al. 2022). Inspired by biological
systems, this approach uses monocular camera input to
compute τ that is a visual cue derived from time-to-contact
and applies it to steering control. The method employs robust
vision-based navigation by leveraging τ values aggregated
from features in the field of view. We refer to this method
as SOFTNav (Sparse Optical Flow with Time-to-Transit
Navigation) for showing the comparison in our evaluation.
To address concerns regarding robustness in dynamic
environments, we additionally include two baseline methods
from the modular and learning-based navigation paradigms.
As a representative modular approach, we evaluate our
method against Model Predictive Contouring Control
(MPCC) (Brito et al. 2019), which optimizes a sequence of
control inputs to follow a reference path while accounting
for dynamic constraints and obstacle avoidance. MPCC has
demonstrated reliable performance in structured navigation
tasks and allows us to assess the reactive capabilities of
our method in the presence of dynamic pedestrians. To
5.2.1

Prepared using sagej.cls

show the advantage of proposed method over an endto-end learning-based baseline, we compared our method
with iPlanner (Yang et al. 2023), a vision-based goalconditioned local planner trained to produce steering and
velocity commands directly from depth images and goal
information. iPlanner has shown strong generalization in
complex indoor and outdoor environments and serves as a
strong baseline for comparing the robustness of our method
to changes in appearance and scene layout.
Testing Environments: We designed five distinct
testing environments, labeled Env1 through Env5, with progressively increasing difficulty based on obstacle proximity
to evaluate the performance of the proposed method on static
obstacle avoidance tasks, as illustrated in Figure 9(a). In
Env1, obstacles are spaced 3 meters apart, whereas in Env5,
the distance between obstacles is reduced to 1 meter. This
gradual reduction in spacing allows for a comprehensive
assessment of POVNav’s performance across varying levels
of obstacle density.
To validate the method on dynamic obstacle avoidance
tasks, we designed a corridor environment with dimensions
of 30 meters by 6 meters, populated with pedestrians, as
illustrated in Figure 9(b). We refer to this environment
as Env6. The pedestrians’ movements followed the social
force model proposed by Helbing and Molnar (1995),
simulating realistic human-like navigation behavior. In all
experiments, the robot’s maximum linear speed was set to
2 m/s, and its maximum angular speed was constrained to
π rad/s. The pedestrians moved with varying speeds, with
a maximum speed of 1.7 m/s, adding dynamic complexity
to the environment. This setup allowed for a comprehensive
evaluation of the proposed method’s ability to avoid dynamic
obstacles.
To increase difficulty for navigation, we also designed
a more complex simulated scenario featuring an L-shaped
corridor, as illustrated in Figure 10. The environment
includes 10 to 40 pedestrians to emulate realistic navigation
conditions with bidirectional human traffic. Specifically, half
of the pedestrians are initialized near the robot’s starting
position and move toward the goal, while the remaining
half begin near the goal and move toward the start. This
configuration ensures that the robot continuously encounters
pedestrians approaching from both directions, thereby
increasing interaction complexity. Furthermore, pedestrian
trajectories are intentionally directed to pass near the corner
of the L-shaped corridor. This design choice creates partial
occlusion in the robot’s field of view, mimicking real-world
blind-spot scenarios and allowing us to assess the system’s
responsiveness to suddenly appearing obstacles.
5.2.2

Results: We start the basic performance evaluation
in simulation with relatively simple environments. We
first compare the proposed POVNav method with VMPP
and SOFTNav across these testing environments. In static
environments, 20 randomly generated start and goal points
were selected, while in dynamic environments that contains
10 pedestrians, the same task was repeated 20 times to
account for the variability introduced by moving obstacles.
The results, presented in Figure 11(a), demonstrate that the
proposed method consistently outperforms the baselines in
all environments. The difference in performance between
5.2.3

Pushp et al.

15

(a) Static Environment (Env1 to Env5)

(b) Dynamic Environment (Env6)

Figure 9. (a) Illustrates the general layout of the simulated environment with static obstacles used for evaluating the static obstacle
avoidance task. (b) Layout of the corridor environment with 10 pedestrians for testing dynamic obstacle avoidance. Pedestrians in
the corridor move at different constant velocities, navigating based on the social force model.

30 meters

Pedestrian moving at constant speed
Start

5 meters

23 meters

18 meters

Goal

Figure 10. Layout of a more challenging environment: an
L-shaped corridor populated with 40 pedestrians moving
bidirectionally to simulate real-world dynamics. The zoomed-in
inset at the lower left highlights diverse pedestrian behaviors and
motion patterns.

POVNav and VMPP becomes increasingly evident in more
cluttered environments. The increasing gap is due to
VMPP’s reliance on depth data for trajectory validation,
limiting its obstacle detection to the depth sensor’s shorter
range, whereas the visual horizon cues used by POVNav
extend farther. This enables POVNav to take preventive
actions for collision avoidance well before VMPP detects
obstacles. Additionally, VMPP requires evaluating more
motion primitives to navigate dense obstacles, making the
set of primitives sufficient for simpler environments (Env1)
inadequate in more complex scenarios.
The SOFTNav method, while showing lower success rates
in static environments due to insufficient feature detection
in these scenarios and its lack of goal-directed navigation
capabilities, exhibits better performance than VMPP in
dynamic environments. This improvement underscores the
effectiveness of the optical flow and time-to-transit concept
in avoiding moving objects, originally inspired by studies of
insect behavior.
Prepared using sagej.cls

In addition to evaluating the success rate, we also assess
the path length. We randomly selected five paths for
evaluation in a sparse environment where the gap between
obstacles is 2 meters, denoted as WP1 to WP5. Among
these, WP2 turned out to be obstacle-free. These paths
include the longest diagonal goal, an obstacle-free goal,
and intermediate point goals. Additionally, we include a
path WP6 in the dynamic environment with three obstacles.
Together, WP1 to WP6 represent the navigation tasks in
the sparse environment. Given the homogeneous nature of
the environment, these paths are sufficient for comparative
studies. We used the same waypoints in a dense static
environment where obstacles are spaced 1 meter apart, and
10 pedestrians are included in the corridor navigation task
instead of three and the start and goal points remain the
same, as shown in Figure 9(b), representing navigation
in the dense environment. We performed 10 successful
trials for each path. The path length was recorded during
the trials, and the deviation from the shortest obstaclefree path for each method is shown in Figure 11(b)
and Figure 11(c). Our comparative analysis demonstrates
that POVNav consistently follows a shorter path than
both VMPP and SOFTNav, except in WP2 across both
environments. In the sparse environment, SOFTNav deviated
slightly in WP2 to maintain equal distance from sorounding
obstacles detected via optical flow, while POVNav and
VMPP followed the shortest path due to the absence of
obstacles on the way and they did not get affected by the
surrounded environment. Generally, SOFTNav tended to
follow longer paths, as its goal-direction-agnostic optic flow
detections led to unnecessary deviations. The performance
of VMPP is highly dependent on the spacing between
candidate motion primitives, as it involves converting the
continuous velocity space of the dynamic window into
discrete options. This method requires careful tuning of
control parameters for optimal results. In densely cluttered
environments, a large number of trajectories need to be
evaluated; however, we used the same parameters across
all methods that was optimized for the sparse environment.
VMPP’s performance did not generalize well across different
environments, as parameters optimized for Env1 did not
yield similar results elsewhere. In contrast, POVNav
exhibited less sensitivity to changes in the environment,
suggesting its adaptability across various conditions without

16

Journal Title XX(X)

14

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

10

POVNav
VMPP
SOFTNav

0.2
0.0

POVNav
VMPP
SOFTNav

12

(a) Success rate vs Environments

15
12

6

9

4

6

2

3
WP1

WP2

WP3

WP4

WP5

WP6

(b) Path length in Sparse Environment

POVNav
VMPP
SOFTNav

18

8

0

Env1 Env2 Env3 Env4 Env5 Env6

21

0

WP1

WP2

WP3

WP4

WP5

WP6

(c) Path length in Dense Environment

Figure 11. Performance analysis of the proposed POVNav method compared to the baselines. (a) The x-axis represents different
testing environments, while the y -axis shows the success rate, illustrating the comparative performance of POVNav across various
environments. Solid lines depict the trend in success rate across all static environments, and the dashed line indicates the transition
from static to dynamic obstacle environment. In (b) and (c), the x-axis corresponds to different navigation tasks, where WP stands
for Waypoint, and the y -axis represents the path length differences from shortest path to goal in meters, demonstrating the efficiency
of the proposed method compared to the baselines.

1.00

1.00

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

0.75

POVNav
VMPP
SOFTNav
10

20

30

POVNav
MPCC

0.50
0.25
40

(a) POVNav vs. Reactive Planners

0.00

10

20

30

40

(b) POVNav vs. Modular Planner

Figure 12. Performance evaluation of the proposed POVNav
method in an L-shaped corridor with varying pedestrian
densities. The x-axis indicates the number of pedestrians in
the scene, while the y -axis denotes the success rate. (a)
Comparison of POVNav with two reactive baselines: VMPP and
SOFTNav, highlighting its superior adaptability under increasing
dynamic complexity. The dashed line indicates inconclusive
or unstable performance trends. (b) Evaluation against
a representative modular baseline, MPCC, demonstrating
POVNav’s robustness in dynamic environments where the goal
is not in front of the robot.

significant parameter adjustments. Interestingly, SOFTNav’s
performance improved significantly in the dynamic dense
environment, with its path length becoming comparable to
that of the proposed method. This environment is ideal for
SOFTNav, as it continuously receives features from nearby
obstacles, allowing it to find the correct control inputs.
This aligns with the insect-inspired navigation behavior that
motivated the development of SOFTNav.
Experiments in the straight corridor provided valuable
insights into the overall performance of POVNav in
comparison to VMPP and SOFTNav. However, in this
setup the goal was always aligned with the robot’s heading
direction. To further assess the robustness of each method,
we extended with a longer L-shaped corridor environment
in which the goal is not directly visible from the start,
as illustrated in Figure 10. This environment demands
not only reactive capabilities but also effective decisionmaking under partial observability and dynamic occlusion.
We referr to these environments as DyEnv1 (10 pedestrians)
through DyEnv4 (40 pedestrians). The robot starts at one
end of the corridor, and the goal is placed at the far end,
Prepared using sagej.cls

approximately 30 meters forward and 20 meters to the right.
Each method was evaluated over 20 independent trials, and
the performance results are summarized in Figure 12.
For a fair comparison, we tuned the parameters of the
four methods (POVNav, VMPP, SOFTNav and MPCC) to
perform optimally in the lowest-density setting (DyEnv1)
and kept these parameters fixed across the higher-density
scenarios. As shown in Figure 12(a), under these conditions,
both POVNav and VMPP achieved good performance
in DyEnv1. However, in this L-shaped environment, we
started observing that SOFTNav struggled consistently due
to its strong dependence on optical flow features, which
are less reliable in low-texture, sparsely colored simulated
environments. Additionally, the L-shaped geometry posed
a significant challenge for SOFTNav, as it frequently
misinterpreted corner features and became stuck at the turn.
As pedestrian density increased, VMPP’s performance
deteriorated significantly, as evidenced by its decreasing
success rate. This degradation is primarily due to increased
reactive latency stemming from the growing number of
motion primitives, which were originally tuned for optimal
performance in the low-density scenario (DyEnv1). In more
crowded environments, the method requires denser and
more frequent evaluation of motion primitives to ensure
safe responses, which in turn increases computational load
and reduces responsiveness. In contrast, POVNav maintains
its responsiveness regardless of the number of pedestrians,
as it depends solely on the visual horizon and imagespace features for decision-making. This lightweight design
enables faster and more proactive reactions to dynamic
obstacles. We capped the pedestrian count at 40, beyond
which the scene became excessively congested. At this point,
the performance disparity between POVNav and the other
baselines became substantially more evident.
POVNav consistently outperformed VMPP and SOFTNav
due to its early and efficient decision-making strategy. Its
computational simplicity allows for rapid evaluation of feasible paths and proactive maneuvers before entering congested
regions. Importantly, as pedestrians enter the robot’s field of
view, they dynamically reshape the visual horizon, thereby
modifying the POG and influencing the visual path. When a
pedestrian approaches closely, the proximity feature triggers
an immediate retreat action. Remarkably, the same set of

Pushp et al.

17

Table 3. Comparison of POVNav and iPlanner in terms of
robustness to environmental changes. Scenario 1: iPlanner is
trained only in a simulated forest environment and tested in
both the forest and an unseen office environment. Scenario 2:
iPlanner is trained in both forest and office environments and
evaluated in the same environments. Success rates are reported
for each case.

iPlanner (Success Rate)
(Forest-trained only)
Forest: 95% Office: 15%
(Forest + Office-trained)
Forest: 100% Office: 90%

Scenario

POG Only

POG+HOG

Full System

1
2
3

100%
0%
0%

100%
85%
45%

100%
100%
80%

POVNav (Success Rate)
Forest: 100%

Office: 85%

Forest: 100%

Office: 90%

parameters tuned in (DyEnv1) remained effective across all
subsequent scenarios, indicating the robustness and generalizability of the proposed approach under increasing dynamic
complexity.
We further evaluated the robustness of POVNav in
dynamic environments by comparing it against MPCC. Note
however, different from VMPP and SOFTNav, the MPCC
approach relies on following a precomputed global path
that avoids static obstacles. For a fair comparison, we
designed this global path such that the MPCC successfully
reaches the goal in the least crowded setting (DyEnv1),
and used the same path across all other experiments to
maintain consistency. MPCC outperforms reactive baselines
like VMPP and SOFTNav in low-density settings, primarily
due to its reliance on the global path, which inherently
steers the robot away from walls and other static structures.
However, as pedestrian density increases, the optimization
overhead in MPCC becomes more pronounced. The need to
replan more frequently in cluttered scenes leads to increased
computational delays and, consequently, a noticeable decline
in success rate, as shown in Figure 12(b).
Lastly, we analyzed the advantages of POVNav over a
learning-based approach by comparing it with iPlanner, a
recently proposed method with publicly available training
and evaluation code. We first trained iPlanner in a simulated
forest environment and evaluated both iPlanner and POVNav
in this training environment, as well as in a previously unseen
indoor office environment to assess generalization. Next,
we incorporated the office environment into the training
dataset and retrained iPlanner. Both methods were then
tested again in both environments to evaluate improvements
in adaptability. To adapt to iPlaner and make the comparison
fair, both methods used depth image for perception.
For each environment, we randomly sampled 20 goal
locations for evaluation. In the office environment, we
excluded goal configurations where U-shaped obstacles
entirely blocked the path between the start and goal, as
neither method (POVNav being purely local planners) could
handle such topologically infeasible cases. The performance
results from these experiments are summarized in Table 3.
It is clearly evident from Table 3 that the learning-based
planner, iPlanner, exhibits a significant drop in performance
when tested in an unseen environment especially if there
is a domain shift. Specifically, when trained solely in
the simulated forest environment, iPlanner achieves a high
success rate of 95% in the forest, but its performance
deteriorates sharply to 15% when deployed in the office
Prepared using sagej.cls

Table 4. Success Rate Comparison in Ablation Studies.
1.Obstacle-free Navigation, 2.Static Obstacle Avoidance and 3.
Dynamic Obstacle Avoidance.

Table 5. Path Length Comparison in Ablation Studies. All
waypoints are 32 meters apart in obstacle-free, static, and
dynamic environments. The obstacles are 2 meters apart in
static environment and the dynamic environment includes 6
pedestrians.

Scenario

POG Only

POG+HOG

Full System

1
2
3

32m
N/A (Fail)
N/A (Fail)

32m
37.16m
34.21m

32m
38.95m
36.21m

environment. This highlights a key limitation of end-toend learning-based methods, their sensitivity to distributional
shifts and lack of generalization when confronted with
novel or structurally different environments. In contrast,
POVNav maintains strong performance across both training
and testing environments, achieving 100% success in the
forest and 85% in the office setting.
Furthermore, when iPlanner is retrained with data
from both forest and office environments, its performance
improves to 90% in the office, matching the performance
of POVNav. However, this improvement comes at the cost
of increased data collection and retraining effort. POVNav,
on the other hand, achieves similar performance without
requiring any additional fine tunning of parameters, allowing
the system to dynamically adjust its behavior based on
environmental conditions or task-specific requirements. The
modular and interpretable nature of POVNav offers a
compelling trade-off between adaptability and transparency,
especially in safety-critical applications.
We also evaluated the computational time of POVNav
and the baseline methods. POVNav demonstrated superior
efficiency, with an average of 0.04 seconds per action,
compared to 0.22 seconds for VMPP and 0.14 seconds for
SOFTNav. This improvement stems from POVNav’s imagebased planning, which eliminates the need for evaluating
multiple 3-D trajectories like VMPP, and is faster than
SOFTNav’s optical flow and time-to-transit computations,
making it ideal for real-time applications.

5.3

Ablation Studies

We conduct ablation studies across three scenarios in a
simulated environment to evaluate the impact of different
components in our visual navigation framework: (i) obstaclefree navigation, (ii) navigation while avoiding static
obstacles, and (iii) navigation while avoiding dynamic
obstacles. Each experiment is designed to isolate and test the
contribution of specific features:
• POG: We assess how the absence of HOG and visual
path affects the robot’s performance in navigating
complex or cluttered areas.

18

Journal Title XX(X)

POG

P1

POG

HOG

P2

(a) Map

(c) POG, HOG and ϕ

(b) POG and HOG

(d) Angular Control

Figure 13. Shows the role of different components in POVNav. The x-axis in all the subplots represents time and y -axis represents
error value. (a) Dashed line shows the obstacle detection status (non-zero value means obstacle detected). (b) Shows the effect of
visual path planning on obstacle avoidance. (c) Shows ϕ controls ω . (d) Shows the effect of λ on v .

POG
HOG

Figure 14. Illustration of obstacle-free goal navigation with
POVNav (λ = λ0 ) for two goal directions (π to 0, −π to 0). The
discontinuity in the plot represents the change in navigation goal.
θ is the heading angle of the robot.

• POG+HOG: The importance of HOG for robust
visual navigation is evaluated, focusing on the success
rate during static and dynamic obstacle avoidance
tasks.
• Visual Path: We compare navigation performance
with and without the visual path planning component.
A comparison of success rates across different navigation
scenarios, highlighting the distinct roles of POG, HOG, and
the visual path in ensuring successful navigation is shown
in Table 4. In an obstacle-free environment, all methods
successfully reached the goal, indicating that POG alone can
effectively map the global goal onto the image boundary and
guide the robot without obstacles. However, in environments
with obstacles, the POG-Only method had a 0% success rate,
as it lacked the capability to avoid obstacles. This suggests
that, while POG alone can be sufficient for guiding the
robot in open spaces, it requires additional support for safe
navigation in cluttered environments. Table 5 shows that all
methods followed the same path in the absence of obstacles,
indicating that HOG and the visual path are not required in
obstacle-free navigation tasks. When HOG was combined
with POG, the success rate increased to 85% in static and
45% in dynamic environments, demonstrating that HOG
provides a local goal perspective that optimizes exploration
and navigation objectives and help avoiding obstacles by
deviating from POG. This supports the hypothesis that HOG
aids in navigating complex environments by helping to avoid
nearby obstacles. Adding the visual path further improved
the success rate, achieving 100% in static and 80% in
dynamic environments. This improvement is attributed to the
visual path’s ability to add a layer of safety by maintaining
a safe distance from obstacles, even if this requires deviating
from the local goal. However, this also led to an increase in
path length, suggesting a trade-off between path efficiency
and safety in more challenging navigation tasks.
Prepared using sagej.cls

By analyzing these cases, we demonstrate that each
component plays a crucial role in enhancing the success rate
of navigation, particularly in scenarios involving static and
dynamic obstacle avoidance. To gain further insight into the
framework, we recorded and analyzed the behavior of all
visual features during both obstacle-free and obstacle-rich
navigation tasks.
To see the role of POG, we performed an experiment in
which we define different goals in random directions of an
obstacle-free, simulated environment. The results are shown
in Figure 14 where the robot aligns itself towards the goal
direction and then it maintains the heading angle until it
reaches the goal. Note that θ, POG, HOG, ϕ overlaps except
for two intervals (π to π/2, −π to − π/2) as a result of
the non-uniform mapping of the goal direction on the image
border. This shows that the implemented mapping function
maintains the correlation of POG with θ. In our case, the
POG updates itself with the same value during that interval.
This also shows that the POG itself is able to navigate the
robot in an obstacle-free environment and can be considered
as a global guide in POVNav.
We introduce obstacles into the environment to evaluate
how POG, HOG, and Visual Path Planning collaboratively
guide the robot to its goal while avoiding obstacles.
Figure 13(a) illustrates the environment setup, with specified
start and goal positions, as well as visible obstacle locations.
Figure 13(b) highlights the sub-goal selection process, which
effectively balances the trade-off (indicated by the green
region) between two conflicting objectives, guiding the robot
towards the goal. The alignment of HOG with POG enhances
traversability by maximizing the robot’s ability to navigate
through complex spaces. Once a sub-goal is chosen, the
robot interacts dynamically with the environment, using
visual path planning to actively avoid obstacles, as shown
in Figure 13(c). Finally, Figure 13(d) presents the calculated
control inputs derived from alignment features, providing a
clearer view of the framework’s complete operation.

5.4

Robustness in the Real-world

We conducted the following experiments to evaluate the
robustness of the proposed method in real-world settings:
• Navigation with noisy segmentation methods.
• Point-to-point navigation in different scenarios.
• Navigation in dense forest trails.
• Navigation under extreme weather conditions.
• Kilometer-scale navigation leveraging visual-inertial
odometry, with GPT-3.5 utilized as a navigability
parser.

Pushp et al.

19

(a) Real World: POG and HOG

(b) Real World: HOG and Visual Path

Figure 15. Real-world navigation task. (a) Sub-goal selection with noisy segmentation, illustrating the effect of segmentation noise
on sub-goal stability. (b) Obstacle avoidance, where frequent fluctuations in HOG highlight segmentation noise. The Visual Obstacle
Avoidance (VOA) regions, indicated between HOG and POG as well as between POG and alignment features, reflect the system’s
adaptive response to maintain navigability despite noise.

Avoided
Tables and Chairs
Goal

Goal
Avoided Pedestrians
Start

Figure 16. Illustration of Jackal robot in the real-world navigating around static obstacles such as walls, tables, and chairs, as well as
dynamic obstacles like pedestrians. The elevation map is used solely for visualizing the path followed and the obstacles encountered.

(a) t1

(b) t2

(c) t3

(d) t4

Figure 17. Shows the POVNav planning image from timestamp t1 to t4 during human pedestrians avoidance. From (a) to (d), the
change in visual path (shown in green color) in real-time with changing obstacle positions shows the active visual path planning of
POVNav to avoid dynamic obstacles in real-world.

5.4.1

Navigation with Noisy Segmentation Techniques
Real-world image segmentation methods often exhibit
inconsistencies in predicting precise boundaries between
segments. This challenge is observed across various
segmentation approaches, including color-based, depthbased, surface normal-based, and deep learning-based
methods, all of which introduce noise in boundary pixel
prediction in the real-world. These inaccuracies impact the
exploration objective of POVNav, leading to significant
fluctuation in the HOG. Nevertheless, the proposed
framework’s active path-planning approach effectively
mitigates these fluctuations.

As shown in Figure 15(a), the POG path remains relatively
smooth, while HOG exhibits noticeable instability due to
segmentation noise. The POVNav framework mitigates these
fluctuations by planning a visual path but only executing the
initial action. This selective approach reduces the impact of
Prepared using sagej.cls

noise on HOG calculations, as illustrated in Figure 15(b).
Even with noisy segmentation, Figure 16 demonstrates the
Jackal robot’s ability to navigate between waypoints and
avoid obstacles. Snapshots at four distinct timestamps in
Figure 17 reveal the robot’s pedestrian avoidance behavior
as the path dynamically updates.
Despite segmentation noise, the robot consistently reaches
its goal in most trials, highlighting POVNav’s robustness in
noisy environments.
5.4.2

Point-to-Point Navigation in Different Scenarios
We conducted rigorous real-world navigation experiments
in four distinct scenarios to further test the navigation
robustness:

• A to B: Transition from on-road to off-road conditions.
• C to D: Navigation through sparse obstacles.

20

Journal Title XX(X)

B
D

Tree 4

Pole

Goal

Tree 3

Goal

t5

Tree 2

C

A

t4

Navigation Task 1
On-road to Off-road

t5

t4

Navigation Task 2
Sparse Trees

Grass
Uneven Surface

t3

Road

Grass
Uneven Surface

t2

Grass
Uneven Surface

t3

Tree 1
t2

t1
Start

Start

t1

t1

t2

t2

t3

t3

t4

t4

t5

t5

(a) On-road to Off-road Transition

t1

(b) Avoiding Sparse Obstacles

Figure 18. Visual representation of two distinct navigation tasks in real-world environments. In the top left, a third-person view
displays the environment with marked start and goal points. A 2.5D elevation map is included to provide context on the terrain and
the robot’s navigation path. Along the path, five key points are selected, each representing the robot’s state at different timestamps.
For each state, four images are presented sequentially from left to right: the RGB image perceived by the robot, the segmented
image generated by Mask2Former (Cheng et al. 2022), the binary segmented image defining navigability, and the path planned by
the robot.

• E to F: Selective navigation where the robot must
avoid grass while heading towards the goal.
• G to H: Navigation through dense forest terrain.
Each experiment was conducted five times under real-world
conditions to evaluate the proposed method’s consistency
and reliability across diverse environments. Performance was
measured through three key metrics: success rate, the number
of human interventions required per run, and the frequency
of redefined navigability criteria. Table 6 summarizes the
results, showing stable performance and adaptability of the
proposed method across varied navigation challenges. As no
changes in navigability criteria were observed across the five
runs in each environment, this measure is not included in the
table.
As shown in Table 6, the robot successfully navigated
between terrain types (A to B) without interventions.
In sparsely cluttered environments (C to D), the system
demonstrated consistent performance, requiring only one
human intervention due to segmentation errors, underscoring
its robustness in low-density scenarios. During selective
Prepared using sagej.cls

navigation tests (E to F), the robot achieved a high success
rate with no human input, indicating its efficiency in targeted
navigation tasks. However, dense forest navigation (G to H)
presented greater challenges, resulting in a lower success
rate with more frequent interventions. This was primarily
due to limitations in the segmentation method (Cheng
et al. 2022), which struggled to accurately interpret the
forest environment’s semantics. Repeating this experiment
with a domain-adaptive method (Chen et al. 2022) trained
on a small deployment dataset led to a 100% success
rate, suggesting that Mask2Former (Cheng et al. 2022)
underperformed compared to domain-adaptive approaches
like CALI (Chen et al. 2022). A representative autonomous
navigation run is visually presented in Figure 18 and
Figure 19. We have used both the robots - Husky and Unitree
Go1 to accomplish this task.
Navigation in Dense Forest Trails This experiment
aims to validate the performance of POVNav and
examine how segmentation methods behave in dense forest
5.4.3

Pushp et al.

21

F

Goal

H

Goal
t5

t5

E

Water

Navigation Task 3
Urban Trail

t4

t3

Bridge

G

t4

Navigation Task 4
Forest Trail
Right Trail

Water

t2

Dense Forest
t3

t2

t1

t1

Start

Dense Forest

Start

t1

t2

t3

t4

t5

(a) Selective Navigation Behavior

(b) Navigating through Dense Forest Trail

Figure 19. Visual representation of two distinct navigation tasks in real-world environments. In the top left in (a) and top right in (b),
a third-person view displays the environment with marked start and goal points. A 2.5D elevation map is included to provide context
on the terrain and the robot’s navigation path. Along the path, five key points are selected, each representing the robot’s state at
different timestamps. For each state, four images are presented sequentially from left to right: the RGB image perceived by the robot,
the segmented image generated by Mask2Former (Cheng et al. 2022), the binary segmented image defining navigability, and the
path planned by the robot.

Figure 20. Illustration of Navigation task in unstructured environments. The green marker indicates the robot’s starting position,
while the blue markers denote the goal positions. The purple marker represents the robot’s state in the image space, and the orange
lines depict the planned safe paths.

environments. Specifically, we assess whether these methods
yield consistent results in such settings and evaluate
POVNav’s capability to handle segmentation inaccuracies.

Prepared using sagej.cls

Two trails were selected within a dense forest, as shown
in Figure 20, with a goal point set 30 meters away. The
robot’s planned paths at five different waypoints are captured

22

Journal Title XX(X)

(a) Road = Navigable; Snow ̸= Navigable

(b) Road ̸= Navigable; Snow = Navigable

(c) Road = Navigable; Snow = Navigable

Figure 21. Navigation under extreme weather conditions. The robot is demonstrating the selective navigable behavior using
POVNav. In (a), snow is designated as non-navigable while the road is navigable. In (b), snow is considered navigable and the
road is non-navigable. In (c), both snow and road are treated as navigable.

Table 6. Success Rate and Human Intervention Analysis in
Different Scenarios

Scenario

Success Rate (%)

Interventions

A to B
C to D
E to F
G to H

100%
100%
100%
80%

0
1
0
2

in snapshots for each trail. Each trail was tested five times.
On Trail 1 (top trail), the robot consistently reached the
goal in all trials. However, on Trail 2 (bottom trail), the
robot failed to reach the goal in two out of five trials
due to insufficient segmentation accuracy on the more
challenging terrain. While improving segmentation accuracy
is beyond the scope of this study, we anticipate that the
proposed method’s performance would further improve with
advancements in segmentation techniques. This experiment
highlights the challenges of accurate segmentation in dense
forest environments, where existing methods often struggle
to identify navigable regions effectively. We observed that
domain-adaptive methods outperform “segment anything”
techniques trained on large, general datasets in these
complex terrains.
5.4.4

Navigation under Extreme Weather Conditions
We evaluated the performance of the proposed method
in a navigation task following a heavy snowfall. The
objective of this experiment was to assess the readiness
of POVNav for real-world applications, particularly in
situations that demand greater flexibility and adaptability
in response to environmental challenges. Since, there are
only black and white pixels in the scene, we used colorbased segmentation method for this experiment. During
the navigation tasks, we observed sudden drift in the
visual odometry; however, this did not compromise the
execution of the navigation task. The local observations
utilized by POVNav effectively guided the robot, allowing
it to handle localization drift without significantly impacting
safety, although the accuracy of reaching the goal have
been affected. POVNav exhibits the capability to selectively
navigate over snow or avoid it, depending on the
conditions. The modular architecture of POVNav allows for
modifications to the navigability definition vector, which is
employed to generate the Navigability Image. This flexibility
facilitates the demonstration of selective navigation behavior
Prepared using sagej.cls

by altering the navigability definitions. Figure 21 illustrates
three scenarios in which the robot navigates using distinct
definitions of navigability vector.
5.4.5 Kilometer-scale Navigation leveraging visualinertial odometry and GPT-3.5 as a navigability parser

We conducted a kilometer-scale navigation task where
the Husky robot was given a direction to go defined in
the local frame and we manipulated the direction clue at
difficult places where a local planner typically suffers. This
experiment aimed to address two primary questions: (1)
How do human-defined navigability definitions align with
complex, real-world environments? (2) How can changing
navigability definitions be handled, given the potential
inaccuracies of segmentation methods?
In our observations, POVNav generally performed well
when segmentation models accurately classified segments,
and when human-defined navigable classes were adequate,
especially in structured environments like urban trails and
paved roadways. However, we found that navigability
definitions need to be updated when transitioning between
different environments, as illustrated by the color-coded
paths in Figure 22. For example, navigating on a sidewalk
requires avoiding grass, whereas in an urban forest
environment, a bridge crossing water or mud might be
preferable over grassy shortcuts, which can be challenging
even for humans to recognize those grass on top of mud or
water as non-navigable. In such cases, the shortest path may
lead the robot over grass; however, human-like navigation
would prefer the bridge.
POVNav facilitates such adaptive navigation by allowing
manual selection of navigable classes to achieve desired
behaviors. To further explore automation in dynamic
navigability, we tested GPT-3.5 as a navigability parser
during environment transitions, with surprising results. In
Figure 22, due to segmentation model inaccuracies, the
path was initially labeled as “sand” or “earth.” With these
classes designated as non-navigable in the urban trail
context, the robot was unable to plan a viable path. When
provided with these classes, GPT-3.5 suggested a revised
navigable set including “path” and “sand” based on context
(see timestamps t1 and t2 in Figure 22). At t3, when
the robot identified “rock” and “stone” classes that also
hindered goal alignment, GPT-3.5 adapted the navigable set,
considering these classes as traversable in the context of
“urban trails, dense forest paths, open spaces, and roadways.”

Pushp et al.

23

P1

Dense Forest Trail (180 m)
Sparse
Forest
Trail (130 m)

t1

t1
t2

Urban
Trail (80 m)

Navigability Definition Changed

Road (900 m)

t2
P2
P1
Navigability Definition Changed

t3

t3

Navigability Definition Changed
P2

Figure 22. Illustration of KM-Sclae navigation task. On the left, the path travelled by the robot are shown on the map with different
colors. From point P1 to P2 the path in while color, we show the elevation map and path travelled by the robot on that map, shoen
in the middle. At time t2, t2 and t3, the robot encountered that the naviaglity definitions are not suffient and hence used GPT-API to
correct it. The segmented image, image after parsing navigability and the planning image (from left to right) are shown in the right
most column. For each timestamp, the images before calling the GPT-API and after are shown.

This adaptive change in visual path planning is evident in
Figure 22.

5.5

POVNav for Solving Real-World Problems

The proposed POVNav framework demonstrates significant
potential in addressing practical challenges in realworld applications. This section highlights one such
application—automated culvert inspection for infrastructure
maintenance—and illustrates how POVNav contributes to
its solution. Culvert inspection involves navigating through
narrow, often constrained environments where traditional
GPS signals are unavailable, and terrain complexity poses
considerable challenges. Additionally, the entry size of
culverts can restrict the deployment of commonly used
robots, necessitating the use of a compact, low-power robot
with limited sensing and computational resources. These
constraints make POVNav particularly well-suited for this
task, as it is computationally efficient and allows for flexible
integration with various segmentation techniques according
to the available computational resources.
Prepared using sagej.cls

POVNav’s vision-based approach supports efficient culvert navigation by utilizing real-time semantic segmentation to identify and follow navigable regions. One of the
core advantages of our approach is the ability to redefine
“navigability” manually, enabling customization of semantic
segmentation models to the unique environment of a culvert. This adaptability ensures that the robot can accurately
interpret and traverse safe surfaces. Additionally, POVNav
can leverage large language models (LLMs) for enhanced
reasoning and contextual adjustments to navigability definitions, enabling improved decision-making in dynamic or
poorly defined environments where conventional semantic
labels may be insufficient. Furthermore, LLMs can assist in
detecting and analyzing structural defects within the culvert.
This integration of semantic segmentation with LLMenhanced reasoning bolsters the system’s robustness,
enabling POVNav to perform effectively in challenging realworld scenarios like culvert inspection. As illustrated in
Figure 23, we deployed POVNav on a robot within a real
culvert with a narrow entryway. We evaluated two segmentation techniques—surface normals and Mask2Former (Cheng

24

Journal Title XX(X)

Figure 23. Illustration of the culvert inspection task. The top row shows the robot’s pose, its traveled path within the culvert, and
the RGB-D point cloud captured at the current timestamp. The middle row begins with an image of the experimental setup, where
the culvert has a 30-inch radius. The modified robot, equipped with two LED lights for enhanced visibility, was outfitted with a LiDAR
sensor, though it was not used in these experiments. The following three images display surface normals, segmentation results
from (Cheng et al. 2022), and the planning image, respectively. In the planning image, the left and right safe boundaries are marked
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the POVNav framework. The bottom row shows third-person views of the robot at four different
timestamps.

et al. 2022). The Mask2Former method produced incorrect
semantic labels within the culvert environment, likely due
to the absence of similar scenes in its training data. Nevertheless, by adjusting the navigability criteria, we successfully directed the robot through the culvert. For instance,
we defined navigable regions to include classes such as
wall, floor, person, earth, ground, water, rock, stone, path,
stairs, land, and soil. Interestingly, although the segmentation model incorrectly labeled certain regions as “person,”
our adjustable navigability framework allowed POVNav to
complete the navigation task effectively by interpreting this
label as part of the navigable environment.
Supplementary Video: A video demonstrating the proposed
method in simulation and real-world environments is
available at: https://youtu.be/wVwIQdXpUM8

5.6

Limitations and Future Work

While POVNav demonstrates promising results in visual
semantic navigation, several limitations present opportunities for future enhancement.
The use of a monocular camera is central to POVNav’s
lightweight design, making it deployable on low-compute
hardware like microcontrollers. However, this configuration
lacks the ability to infer depth, restricting environmental
understanding to segmented classes without explicit obstacle
structure information. Consequently, POVNav heavily relies
on the segmentation method’s accuracy for obstacle detection and avoidance. We can integrate depth sensors or utilize
Prepared using sagej.cls

stereoscopic vision to enable richer environmental context,
enhancing both obstacle detection and the robustness of path
planning.
When the robot traverses steep inclines or declines,
the camera’s roll and pitch can alter its field of view,
potentially limiting its ability to capture necessary features
for feasible path identification and directly affecting the
exploration objective of the POVNav. In such cases, the
camera may predominantly capture non-navigable surfaces,
compromising path planning efficacy. A possible direction
to solve this problem is incorporating IMU data to account
for roll and pitch effects could maintain a stable navigable
viewpoint, helping ensure continuous feature availability in
challenging terrains.
While POVNav’s paths are efficiently planned in visual
space, they may not always be dynamically feasible in realworld scenarios due to the robot’s kinematic and dynamic
constraints. By learning feasible trajectories in the images
space that consider both the robot’s dynamics and the
physical properties of its surroundings, future iterations of
POVNav could yield paths that are better aligned with realworld motion constraints.
Currently, navigability definitions rely on human input
or naive GPT-3.5 API utilization, which may not fully
capture environmental variability. Segmentation methods are
imperfect and can dynamically reclassify the same terrain
across different times of day. Our extensive experimentation
revealed that navigability definitions shifted within the
same environment throughout the day. For instance, in

Pushp et al.

late afternoon, shadows cast by tree branches on the
ground were occasionally detected as poles, categorizing
them as non-navigable obstacles. This observation highlights
the impact of temporal lighting changes on segmentation
accuracy. Future advancements could explore the integration
of physical properties, such as IMU-based vibration analysis
over varied surfaces, to assess factors like friction and ground
consistency. These attributes could provide additional
context, helping the system adaptively refine traversability
definitions and thereby improve navigation robustness.
These enhancements present a path forward for refining
POVNav into a more versatile and resilient navigation
framework, particularly suited to environments with dynamic
conditions and constrained compute resources.
Finally, while the current control law ensures bounded
velocities, it does not explicitly enforce dynamic feasibility
under traction-limited conditions. In high-speed navigation
scenarios, especially on low-friction or uneven surfaces,
the combined lateral and longitudinal acceleration can
exceed the platform’s traction capacity, resulting in loss of
control. As a future direction, we plan to incorporate a
traction-aware control mechanism into POVNav. This would
involve adaptively modulating the translational velocity v
based on the commanded angular velocity ω and estimated
friction limits, thereby enforcing the dynamics constraint
during motion planning and control. This extension will
allow POVNav to operate safely and robustly at higher
speeds and in more challenging terrain, improving real-world
deployment capabilities.

6

Conclusion

This paper presents a visual semantic navigation system,
POVNav, designed to empower autonomous robots with
robust navigation capabilities in diverse real-world environments. By leveraging semantic segmentation to distinguish
traversable regions from obstacles, POVNav enables robots
to achieve near-human-like navigation behavior, essential for
complex and dynamic applications. The framework’s modular design integrates the flexibility of end-to-end imageto-action mapping without the need for specialized or
semantic maps, making it both adaptable and efficient. It
further allows for the integration of advanced learningbased semantic understanding techniques while introducing
mechanisms to mitigate errors when confronted with outof-distribution data—a common occurrence in real-world
deployment. Additionally, while POVNav is compatible with
sophisticated segmentation techniques, it retains the flexibility to operate with simpler segmentation methods, such as
color-based or surface-normal approaches, underscoring its
broad applicability. Also, each component of POVNav can
be further refined or replaced to enhance its suitability for
increasingly challenging scenarios, underscoring its versatility and practical value.
We conducted extensive simulation and field experiments
to validate each component of POVNav. In simulations,
the proposed system demonstrated superior performance
compared to existing methods, excelling in success rate,
path length efficiency, computational speed, and resilience
to dynamic obstacles. Field experiments were performed
in varied settings—indoor navigation with a Jackal robot
Prepared using sagej.cls

25

utilizing noisy surface-normal segmentation, which tested
POVNav’s capacity for waypoint navigation and obstacle
avoidance under a highly unstable visual horizon. Outdoor
trials, conducted with both Husky and Unitree Go1 robots,
included navigating harsh weather conditions with minimal
drift or instability, despite the extreme cold affecting the goal
direction sensors. These experiments employed basic colorbased segmentation to navigate stark black-and-white visual
environments, illustrating the method’s adaptability.
We performed long-range navigation in urban trails, sparse
and dense forest trails, structured roads, and populated
campus pathways. These tests were conducted across
different times of day, seasons (fall and winter), and
varying environmental conditions, revealing the dynamic
nature of current state-of-the-art segmentation models. Our
work highlights the potential of vision-language models to
dynamically adjust navigability definitions in response to
shifting environmental semantics, a capability that bridges
the limitations of conventional segmentation modules. Frame
rates for segmentation during these experiments varied
between 1 Hz and 30 Hz, with POVNav successfully
adapting to these constraints. The reliability demonstrated
across more than 100 successful real-world navigation trials,
spanning different robots, environments, and segmentation
methods motivated us to extend this approach to real-world
applications such as culvert inspection.

7

Acknowledgement

The authors extend their appreciation to Md. Al-Masrur
Khan and Mahmoud Ali for their assistance in conducting
the hardware experiment in the wild. Additionally, the
authors sincerely thank all anonymous reviewers for their
invaluable and constructive feedback, which has significantly
contributed to the improvement and enhanced quality of this
manuscript.

8

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

9

Funding

The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial
support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article. This work was partially supported by (1) NSF:
CAREER: Autonomous Live Sketching of Dynamic
Environments by Exploiting Spatiotemporal Variations
(grant no 2047169); (2) U.S. Army Research Office and
was accomplished under Cooperative Agreement Number
W911NF-22-2-0018: Scalable, Adaptive, and Resilient
Autonomy (SARA); (3) U.S. Army Engineer Research and
Development Center (grant no W912HZ2320003, subaward
no M2303647). The views and conclusions contained in
this document are those of the authors and should not
be interpreted as representing the official policies, either
expressed or implied, of the U.S. Government. The U.S.
Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any
copyright notation herein.

26

References
Anand V, Pushp D, Raj R and Das K (2019) Gaussian mixture
model based object detection and tracking using dynamic patch
estimation. In: 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems. pp. 4474–4481.
Anderson P, Chang A, Chaplot DS, Dosovitskiy A, Gupta S, Koltun
V, Kosecka J, Malik J, Mottaghi R, Savva M et al. (2018)
On evaluation of embodied navigation agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.06757 .
Argus M, Hermann L, Long J and Brox T (2020) Flowcontrol:
Optical flow based visual servoing. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
pp. 7534–7541.
Bailer C, Taetz B and Stricker D (2015) Flow fields: Dense
correspondence fields for highly accurate large displacement
optical flow estimation.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision. pp. 4015–4023.
Bansal S, Tolani V, Gupta S, Malik J and Tomlin C (2020)
Combining optimal control and learning for visual navigation
in novel environments. In: Conference on Robot Learning. pp.
420–429.
Bista SR, Giordano PR and Chaumette F (2016) Appearance-based
indoor navigation by ibvs using line segments. IEEE robotics
and automation letters 1(1): 423–430.
Boretti C, Bich P, Zhang Y and Baillieul J (2022) Visual navigation
using sparse optical flow and time-to-transit.
In: 2022
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. pp.
9397–9403.
Braillon C, Pradalier C, Crowley J and Laugier C (2006) Real-time
moving obstacle detection using optical flow models. In: 2006
IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium. pp. 466–471.
Brito B, Floor B, Ferranti L and Alonso-Mora J (2019) Model
predictive contouring control for collision avoidance in
unstructured dynamic environments. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters 4(4): 4459–4466. DOI:10.1109/LRA.2019.
2929976.
Carlone L and Karaman S (2018) Attention and anticipation in
fast visual-inertial navigation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics
35(1): 1–20.
Chang CK, Siagian C and Itti L (2010) Mobile robot vision
navigation & localization using gist and saliency. In: 2010
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems. IEEE, pp. 4147–4154.
Chaplot DS, Jiang H, Gupta S and Gupta A (2020a) Semantic
curiosity for active visual learning. In: Computer Vision–ECCV
2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28,
2020, Proceedings, Part VI 16. Springer, pp. 309–326.
Chaplot DS, Salakhutdinov R, Gupta A and Gupta S (2020b)
Neural topological slam for visual navigation. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. pp. 12875–12884.
Chaumette F and Hutchinson S (2006) Visual servo control. i. basic
approaches. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 13(4):
82–90.
Chen LC, Papandreou G, Kokkinos I, Murphy K and Yuille AL
(2017a) Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep
convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected
crfs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence 40(4): 834–848.

Prepared using sagej.cls

Journal Title XX(X)

Chen LC, Papandreou G, Schroff F and Adam H (2017b) Rethinking atrous convolution for semantic image segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.05587 .
Chen M, Xue H and Cai D (2019) Domain adaptation for semantic
segmentation with maximum squares loss. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision.
pp. 2090–2099.
Chen Z, Ding Z, Crandall DJ and Liu L (2023a) Polyline
generative navigable space segmentation for autonomous
visual navigation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8(4):
2054–2061.
Chen Z, Ding Z, Gregory JM and Liu L (2023b) Ida: Informed
domain adaptive semantic segmentation. In: 2023 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, pp. 90–97.
Chen Z, Pushp D, Gregory JM and Liu L (2023c) Pseudotrilateral adversarial training for domain adaptive traversability
prediction. Autonomous Robots 47(8): 1155–1174.
Chen Z, Pushp D and Liu L (2022) CALI: Coarse-toFine ALIgnments Based Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
of Traversability Prediction for Deployable Autonomous
Navigation. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems.
New York City, NY, USA, pp. 1–14.
Cheng B, Misra I, Schwing AG, Kirillov A and Girdhar R
(2022) Masked-attention mask transformer for universal image
segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 1290–1299.
Conroy J, Gremillion G, Ranganathan B and Humbert JS (2009)
Implementation of wide-field integration of optic flow for
autonomous quadrotor navigation. Autonomous robots 27:
189–198.
Courbon J, Mezouar Y and Martinet P (2008) Indoor navigation
of a non-holonomic mobile robot using a visual memory.
Autonomous Robots 25(3): 253–266.
Dame A and Marchand E (2011) A new information theoretic
approach for appearance-based navigation of non-holonomic
vehicle. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation. pp. 2459–2464.
de Croon GC, De Wagter C and Seidl T (2021) Enhancing opticalflow-based control by learning visual appearance cues for
flying robots. Nature Machine Intelligence 3(1): 33–41.
Dosovitskiy A, Beyer L, Kolesnikov A, Weissenborn D, Zhai X,
Unterthiner T, Dehghani M, Minderer M, Heigold G, Gelly S
et al. (2020) An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 .
Dwivedi K, Sadiya S, Balode MP, Roig G and Cichy RM (2024)
Visual features are processed before navigational affordances
in the human brain. Scientific Reports 14(1): 5573.
Fox D, Burgard W and Thrun S (1997) The dynamic window
approach to collision avoidance. IEEE Robotics & Automation
Magazine 4(1): 23–33.
Franz MO and Mallot HA (2000) Biomimetic robot navigation.
Robotics and autonomous Systems 30(1-2): 133–153.
Ganin Y, Ustinova E, Ajakan H, Germain P, Larochelle H,
Laviolette F, Marchand M and Lempitsky V (2016) Domainadversarial training of neural networks. The journal of machine
learning research 17(1): 2096–2030.
Giachetti A, Campani M and Torre V (1998) The use of optical
flow for road navigation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics and
Automation 14(1): 34–48.

Pushp et al.

Hahn M, Chaplot DS, Tulsiani S, Mukadam M, Rehg JM and Gupta
A (2021) No rl, no simulation: Learning to navigate without
navigating.
Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 34: 26661–26673.
Helbing D and Molnar P (1995) Social force model for pedestrian
dynamics. Physical review E 51(5): 4282.
Hirose N, Taguchi S, Xia F, Martı́n-Martı́n R, Tahara K, Ishigaki
M and Savarese S (2021) Probabilistic visual navigation
with bidirectional image prediction. In: 2021 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
pp. 1539–1546.
Hoffman J, Tzeng E, Park T, Zhu JY, Isola P, Saenko K, Efros A and
Darrell T (2018) Cycada: Cycle-consistent adversarial domain
adaptation. In: International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, pp. 1989–1998.
Hoffman J, Wang D, Yu F and Darrell T (2016) Fcns in the wild:
Pixel-level adversarial and constraint-based adaptation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.02649 .
Honegger D, Meier L, Tanskanen P and Pollefeys M (2013) An
open source and open hardware embedded metric optical flow
cmos camera for indoor and outdoor applications. In: 2013
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
pp. 1736–1741.
Hong J, Tan X, Pinette B, Weiss R and Riseman EM (1992) Imagebased homing. IEEE Control Systems Magazine 12(1): 38–45.
Hoyer L, Dai D and Van Gool L (2021) Daformer: Improving network architectures and training strategies for domain-adaptive
semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.14887 .
Hoyer L, Dai D and Van Gool L (2022a) Daformer: Improving
network architectures and training strategies for domainadaptive semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 9924–9935.
Hoyer L, Dai D and Van Gool L (2022b) Hrda: Context-aware
high-resolution domain-adaptive semantic segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.13132 .
Hui TW, Tang X and Loy CC (2018) Liteflownet: A lightweight
convolutional neural network for optical flow estimation. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. pp. 8981–8989.
Ilg E, Cicek O, Galesso S, Klein A, Makansi O, Hutter F and Brox
T (2018) Uncertainty estimates and multi-hypotheses networks
for optical flow. In: Proceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Vision. pp. 652–667.
Ilg E, Mayer N, Saikia T, Keuper M, Dosovitskiy A and Brox T
(2017) Flownet 2.0: Evolution of optical flow estimation with
deep networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 2462–2470.
Janschek K, Janschek V and Beck M (2006) Performance analysis
for visual planetary landing navigation using optical flow and
dem matching. In: AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control
Conference and Exhibit. p. 6706.
Jayender J, Azizian M and Patel RV (2008) Autonomous
image-guided robot-assisted active catheter insertion. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics 24(4): 858–871.
Jia Z, Balasuriya A and Challa S (2009) Vision based target tracking
for autonomous land vehicle navigation: a brief survey. Recent
Patents on Computer Science 2(1): 32–42.

Prepared using sagej.cls

27

Karnan H, Warnell G, Xiao X and Stone P (2022) Voila:
Visual-observation-only imitation learning for autonomous
navigation. In: 2022 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, pp. 2497–2503.
Khan MAM, Pushp D and Liu L (2025) Afrda: Attentive feature
refinement for domain adaptive semantic segmentation. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters .
Kim N, Kwon O, Yoo H, Choi Y, Park J and Oh S
(2023) Topological semantic graph memory for image-goal
navigation. In: Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, pp.
393–402.
Kirillov A, Mintun E, Ravi N, Mao H, Rolland C, Gustafson L,
Xiao T, Whitehead S, Berg AC, Lo WY et al. (2023) Segment
anything. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 4015–4026.
Koreitem K, Shkurti F, Manderson T, Chang WD, Higuera JCG
and Dudek G (2020) One-shot informed robotic visual search
in the wild. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems. pp. 5800–5807.
Kwon O, Kim N, Choi Y, Yoo H, Park J and Oh S (2021) Visual
graph memory with unsupervised representation for visual
navigation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
conference on computer vision. pp. 15890–15899.
Kwon O, Park J and Oh S (2023) Renderable neural radiance
map for visual navigation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp.
9099–9108.
Károly AI, Elek RN, Haidegger T, Széll K and Galambos P (2019)
Optical flow-based segmentation of moving objects for mobile
robot navigation using pre-trained deep learning models. In:
2019 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics. pp. 3080–3086.
Lei X, Wang M, Zhou W, Li L and Li H (2024) Instance-aware
exploration-verification-exploitation for instance imagegoal
navigation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 16329–16339.
Li Y and Košecka J (2020) Learning view and target invariant
visual servoing for navigation. In: 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, pp.
658–664.
Liu H, Hong TH, Herman M, Camus T and Chellappa R (1998)
Accuracy vs efficiency trade-offs in optical flow algorithms.
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 72(3): 271–286.
Liu S, Huang S, Xu X, Lloret J and Muhammad K (2023)
Efficient visual tracking based on fuzzy inference for intelligent
transportation systems. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 24(12): 15795–15806.
Liu S and Okatani T (2022) Symmetry-aware neural architecture for
embodied visual exploration. In: 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). IEEE,
pp. 17221–17230.
Liu Z, Li X, Luo P, Loy CC and Tang X (2017) Deep learning
markov random field for semantic segmentation.
IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
40(8): 1814–1828.
Long J, Shelhamer E and Darrell T (2015) Fully convolutional
networks for semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
pp. 3431–3440.

28

Luo Y, Zheng L, Guan T, Yu J and Yang Y (2019) Taking a
closer look at domain shift: Category-level adversaries for
semantics consistent domain adaptation. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 2507–2516.
Mammarella M, Campa G, Fravolini M, Gu Y, Seanor B and
Napolitano M (2008) A comparison of optical flow algorithms
for real time aircraft guidance and navigation. In: AIAA
Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference and Exhibit. p.
7494.
Manderson T, Higuera JCG, Wapnick S, Tremblay JF, Shkurti F,
Meger D and Dudek G (2020) Vision-Based Goal-Conditioned
Policies for Underwater Navigation in the Presence of
Obstacles. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems.
Corvalis, Oregon, USA, pp. 1–10.
Mateus D, Avina G and Devy M (2005) Robot visual navigation
in semi-structured outdoor environments. In: Proceedings
of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation. IEEE, pp. 4691–4696.
McCarthy C and Bames N (2004) Performance of optical flow
techniques for indoor navigation with a mobile robot. In: IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2004.
Proceedings. ICRA ’04. 2004, volume 5. pp. 5093–5098.
Mei K, Zhu C, Zou J and Zhang S (2020) Instance adaptive selftraining for unsupervised domain adaptation. In: Computer
Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK,
August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXVI 16. Springer, pp.
415–430.
Menegatti E, Maeda T and Ishiguro H (2004) Image-based memory
for robot navigation using properties of omnidirectional
images. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 47(4): 251–267.
Meronen L, Wilkinson WJ and Solin A (2020) Movement tracking
by optical flow assisted inertial navigation. In: 2020 IEEE 23rd
International Conference on Information Fusion. pp. 1–8.
Mielle M, Magnusson M and Lilienthal AJ (2016) Using sketchmaps for robot navigation: Interpretation and matching. In:
2016 IEEE international symposium on safety, security, and
rescue robotics (SSRR). IEEE, pp. 252–257.
Ohnishi N and Imiya A (2006) Dominant plane detection from
optical flow for robot navigation. Pattern Recognition Letters
27(9): 1009–1021.
Otte MW, Richardson SG, Mulligan J and Grudic G (2009) Path
planning in image space for autonomous robot navigation in
unstructured environments. Journal of Field Robotics 26(2):
212–240.
Pan X, Zhang T, Ichter B, Faust A, Tan J and Ha S (2020) Zeroshot imitation learning from demonstrations for legged robot
visual navigation. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, pp. 679–685.
Ponce H, Brieva J and Moya-Albor E (2018) Distance estimation
using a bio-inspired optical flow strategy applied to neurorobotics. In: 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks. pp. 1–7.
Pushp D, Chen Z, Luo C, Gregory JM and Liu L (2023) Povnav:
A pareto-optimal mapless visual navigator. In: International
Symposium on Experimental Robotics. Springer, pp. 250–263.
Pushp D, Kalhapure S, Das K and Liu L (2022) Uav-miniugv hybrid
system for hidden area exploration and manipulation. In: 2022
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems. pp. 1297–1304.

Prepared using sagej.cls

Journal Title XX(X)

Ranftl R, Bochkovskiy A and Koltun V (2021) Vision transformers
for dense prediction. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 12179–
12188.
Ranjan A and Black MJ (2017) Optical flow estimation using
a spatial pyramid network. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp.
4161–4170.
Ren Z, Yan J, Ni B, Liu B, Yang X and Zha H (2017) Unsupervised
deep learning for optical flow estimation. Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 31(1).
Rondon E, Fantoni-Coichot I, Sanchez A and Sanahuja G
(2009) Optical flow-based controller for reactive and relative
navigation dedicated to a four rotor rotorcraft. In: 2009
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems. pp. 684–689.
Ronneberger O, Fischer P and Brox T (2015) U-net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation. In: International
Conference on Medical image computing and computerassisted intervention. pp. 234–241.
Saito K, Watanabe K, Ushiku Y and Harada T (2018) Maximum
classifier discrepancy for unsupervised domain adaptation. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. pp. 3723–3732.
Shen WB, Xu D, Zhu Y, Guibas LJ, Fei-Fei L and Savarese S (2019)
Situational fusion of visual representation for visual navigation.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision. pp. 2881–2890.
Sivakumar AN, Modi S, Gasparino MV, Ellis C, Baquero Velasquez
AE, Chowdhary G and Gupta S (2021) Learned Visual
Navigation for Under-Canopy Agricultural Robots.
In:
Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems. Virtual, pp. 1–
15.
Song D, Liang J, Xiao X and Manocha D (2024) Tgs:
Trajectory generation and selection using vision language
models in mapless outdoor environments. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.02454 .
Song KT and Huang JH (2001) Fast optical flow estimation and its
application to real-time obstacle avoidance. In: Proceedings
2001 ICRA. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, volume 3. pp. 2891–2896 vol.3.
Soundararajan R and Bovik AC (2013) Survey of information
theory in visual quality assessment. Signal, Image and Video
Processing 7: 391–401.
Srinivasan MV, Chahl JS, Weber K, Venkatesh S, Nagle MG and
Zhang SW (1999) Robot navigation inspired by principles of
insect vision. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 26(2-3): 203–
216.
Srivastava R, Lima R, Shinde C, Pushp D and Das K (2021)
Estimation and control for autonomous uav system to
neutralize unknown aerial maneuvering target. In: 2021
Seventh Indian Control Conference. pp. 117–122.
Talukder A and Matthies L (2004) Real-time detection of moving
objects from moving vehicles using dense stereo and optical
flow.
In: 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, volume 4. pp. 3718–3725 vol.4.
Vakil MI, Malas JA and Megherbi DB (2015) Information theoretic
approach for template matching in registration of partially
overlapped aerial imagery. In: 2015 National Aerospace and
Electronics Conference (NAECON). IEEE, pp. 146–150.

Pushp et al.

van der Zwaan S, Bernardino A and Santos-Victor J (2002)
Visual station keeping for floating robots in unstructured
environments. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 39(3-4):
145–155.
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN,
Kaiser Ł and Polosukhin I (2017) Attention is all you need.
Advances in neural information processing systems 30.
Wang H, Shen T, Zhang W, Duan LY and Mei T (2020) Classes
matter: A fine-grained adversarial approach to cross-domain
semantic segmentation. In: European Conference on Computer
Vision. Springer, pp. 642–659.
Wang Y, Wang H, Liu B, Liu Y, Wu J and Lu Z (2021) A visual
navigation framework for the aerial recovery of uavs. IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 70: 1–13.
Wasserman J, Yadav K, Chowdhary G, Gupta A and Jain U (2023)
Last-mile embodied visual navigation. In: Conference on Robot
Learning. PMLR, pp. 666–678.
Wellhausen L, Ranftl R and Hutter M (2020) Safe robot navigation
via multi-modal anomaly detection. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters 5(2): 1326–1333.
Wu Q, Gong X, Xu K, Manocha D, Dong J and Wang J (2020)
Towards target-driven visual navigation in indoor scenes via
generative imitation learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters 6(1): 175–182.
Wu Q, Xu K, Wang J, Xu M, Gong X and Manocha D
(2021) Reinforcement learning-based visual navigation with
information-theoretic regularization.
IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters 6(2): 731–738.
Wulff J and Black MJ (2015) Efficient sparse-to-dense optical flow
estimation using a learned basis and layers. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 120–130.
Xie B, Yuan L, Li S, Liu CH and Cheng X (2022) Towards fewer
annotations: Active learning via region impurity and prediction
uncertainty for domain adaptive semantic segmentation. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 8068–8078.
Xie E, Wang W, Yu Z, Anandkumar A, Alvarez JM and
Luo P (2021) Segformer: Simple and efficient design for
semantic segmentation with transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.15203 .
Yamada H, Tominaga T and Ichikawa M (2003) An autonomous
flying object navigated by real-time optical flow and visual
target detection. In: Proceedings. 2003 IEEE International
Conference on Field-Programmable Technology. pp. 222–227.
Yan C, Qin J, Liu Q, Ma Q and Kang Y (2022) Mapless navigation
with safety-enhanced imitation learning. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics 70(7): 7073–7081.
Yang F, Wang C, Cadena C and Hutter M (2023) iPlanner:
Imperative Path Planning. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science
and Systems. Daegu, Republic of Korea. DOI:10.15607/RSS.
2023.XIX.064.
Yu F and Koltun V (2015) Multi-scale context aggregation by
dilated convolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07122 .
Zhai M, Xiang X, Lv N and Kong X (2021) Optical flow and scene
flow estimation: A survey. Pattern Recognition 114: 107861.
Zhang J, Sun J, Wang J and Yue XG (2021) Visual object tracking
based on residual network and cascaded correlation filters.
Journal of ambient intelligence and humanized computing 12:
8427–8440.

Prepared using sagej.cls

29

Zhang M, Li Y and Yang J (2008) Autonomous visual navigation
guided by path boundaries for mobile robot.
In: 2008
International Conference on Computer Science and Software
Engineering, volume 6. IEEE, pp. 344–348.
Zhao H, Shi J, Qi X, Wang X and Jia J (2017) Pyramid scene parsing
network. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition. pp. 2881–2890.
Zhao Y and Pei H (2013) Object tracking based on particle filter
with discriminative features. Journal of control Theory and
Applications 11(1): 42–53.
Zheng S, Lu J, Zhao H, Zhu X, Luo Z, Wang Y, Fu Y, Feng J, Xiang
T, Torr PH et al. (2021) Rethinking semantic segmentation
from a sequence-to-sequence perspective with transformers. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 6881–6890.
Zingg S, Scaramuzza D, Weiss S and Siegwart R (2010) Mav
navigation through indoor corridors using optical flow. In: 2010
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
pp. 3361–3368.
Zou Y, Yu Z, Kumar B and Wang J (2018) Unsupervised domain
adaptation for semantic segmentation via class-balanced selftraining. In: Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision (ECCV). pp. 289–305.
Zou Y, Yu Z, Liu X, Kumar B and Wang J (2019) Confidence
regularized self-training. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 5982–5991.

