Demonstration-Enhanced Adaptable Multi-Objective Robot Navigation

arXiv:2404.04857v5 [cs.RO] 18 Oct 2025

Jorge de Heuvel

Tharun Sethuraman

Abstract— Preference-aligned robot navigation in human
environments is typically achieved through learning-based
approaches, utilizing user feedback or demonstrations for
personalization. However, personal preferences are subject to
change and might even be context-dependent. Yet traditional
reinforcement learning (RL) approaches with static reward
functions often fall short in adapting to evolving user preferences,
inevitably reflecting demonstrations once training is completed.
This paper introduces a structured framework that combines
demonstration-based learning with multi-objective reinforcement
learning (MORL). To ensure real-world applicability, our
approach allows for dynamic adaptation of the robot navigation
policy to changing user preferences without retraining. It fluently
modulates the amount of demonstration data reflection and other
preference-related objectives. Through rigorous evaluations,
including a baseline comparison and sim-to-real transfer on two
robots, we demonstrate our framework’s capability to adapt to
user preferences accurately while achieving high navigational
performance in terms of collision avoidance and goal pursuance.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Mobile robot navigation has significantly advanced with
deep reinforcement learning (RL), enabling end-to-end policies that traverse complex environments with foresighted
and nuanced behaviors. In scenarios involving human-robot
interaction, however, it becomes crucial to align these
policies with user preferences [1], [2], e.g., on approaching
behavior, proxemics, and navigational efficiency, to achieve
acceptance [3].
However, traditional RL-based navigation methods typically
optimize for static and pre-configured objectives in their reward scheme such as path efficiency or obstacle avoidance [4],
neglecting user preferences and their variability over time.
As a result, these methods lack mechanisms to adapt to
shifting user preferences dynamically and require retraining
to accommodate behavior changes, highlighting a significant
gap in the current methodology.
A common strategy for addressing user preferences is
learning from demonstrations. To preference-align RL-based
navigation around the human, de Heuvel et al. [2], [5]
have employed an additional behavior cloning loss driven
by demonstration data. However, these approaches do not
provide principled ways to dynamically trade off demonstrated
behaviors against core navigation objectives such as efficiency
All authors are with the Humanoid Robots Lab, University of Bonn,
Germany. M. Bennewitz and J. de Heuvel are additionally with the Lamarr
Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence and the Center
for Robotics, Bonn, Germany. This work has been partially funded by the
BMBF, grant No. 16KIS1949 and within the Robotics Institute Germany,
grant No. 16ME0999, as well as by the DFG, grant No. BE 4420/2-2 (FOR
2535 Anticipating Human Behavior).
We sincerely thank Murad Dawood for his valuable feedback in revising
the manuscript.

Maren Bennewitz

Fig. 1: Our framework integrates demonstration-based learning into multiobjective reinforcement learning, enabling robots to adapt navigation policies
to users’ changing preferences even after training. a) The navigation style
can fluently shift between demonstration-induced, distance keeping, and
efficiency objectives. b) We modulate the MORL reward vector r t with a
c) varying preference λ, while providing λ as input to the agent. d) The
resulting human-centered policy can generate a spectrum of trajectories,
here sketched for the objectives of demonstration-reflection (red, here: wallfollowing) and path efficiency (yellow).

and collision avoidance. This can lead to overly conservative
or inconsistent behavior, reducing usability in real-world
applications. It becomes essential to devise mechanisms
that can modulate the influence of demonstrations by user
preferences, even after training.
To overcome these challenges, we propose a novel framework that integrates demonstration-based learning (LfD)
into multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) to
achieve flexible and preference-aware robot navigation (see
Fig. 1). This combination extends MORL’s on-the-fly policy
adaptation capabilities [6] by modulating the influence of
demonstrations and other objectives without retraining.
Specifically, our combined approach of LfD and MORL
provides a structured way to incorporate user demonstrations
as one of multiple competing objectives, enabling situationally
adaptable trade-offs between demonstration adherence and
navigational core objectives Focusing on the robotic application, our experimental results demonstrate robust performance
and accurate preference reflection for both a static and moving
user. Finally, a comprehensive sim-to-real transfer on two
different robotic platforms further validates the feasibility
and robustness of our method in human-centered navigation
tasks.
In summary, the main contributions of our work are:
• A multi-objective reinforcement learning human-aware
robot navigation framework that enables policy adaptation to preferences post-training.
• The structured incorporation of demonstration data as a
tuneable objective.
• Comparative navigation experiments in simulation validating demonstration modulation, behavior adaptation,
robustness and generalization, concluded by a real-world
transfer and evaluation on two different robots.

II. R ELATED W ORK
The concept of user-aware personalized navigation is
gaining momentum, emphasizing robots that adapt their
strategies based on individual user preferences. Users can
express preferences through ranking trajectory queries [7],
[8] or providing demonstrations [2], [5], [9]. Both feedback
types can distill a preference-aligned navigation policy. While
trajectory ranking can be used to extract user preferences [10],
this work establishes a demonstration-infused policy that
aligns on-the-fly without retraining through multi-objective
reinforcement learning (MORL).
The concept of optimizing for multiple objectives has
already been applied in traditional non-RL navigation approaches [11], [12], [13]. Traditional methods however are
limited by their inability to integrate preference-conveying
demonstration data. In the context of RL, MORL extends
standard RL by enabling the simultaneous optimization of
multiple objectives. MORL frameworks exist for discrete [14]
and continuous action spaces [15], [16], while the latter are
particularly interesting for robotic tasks. So far, MORL has
been applied to autonomous driving [17] and robotic tasks
such as manipulation [18], navigation [10], [19], [20], [21],
and path planning [22].
Ballou et al. [23] used meta reinforcement learning to
adjust robot navigation among humans, efficiently fine-tuning
policies for changes in the reward function, such as goal
pursuance or distance keeping. However, their adaptation to
shifting objectives is not instantaneous but rather requires
an adaptation training phase. In contrast, our MORL policy
adapts to preference weight changes in the preference space
immediately.
Cheng et al. [19] proposed a MORL-based navigation
policy that adapts to dynamic preferences over multiple
navigation objectives in human environments, utilizing deep
Q-networks for preference-weighted action selection. Similar
to our approach, their method processes 2D lidar data as input.
However, unlike our approach, they employ a discrete action
space with acceleration commands, whereas we utilize MORLenabled TD3 actor-critic architecture with a continuous action
space of linear and angular velocity control for smooth
motions.
Cheng et al. [20] presented an approach to learn robot
navigation in human-populated environments leveraging a
multi-objective reward vector formulation. Compared to our
study, they are not accounting for different preferences, as
their approach optimizes a fixed set of objectives without
mechanisms to adjust trade-offs dynamically. Choi et al.
[7] proposed to use multi-agent training with parameterized
rewards and action commands for adaptable robot navigation.
Parameterized rewards can be used with standard RL policies,
potentially at the cost of weaker multi-objective optimization.
In contrast, our agent estimates Q-values for different objectives separately while incorporating tunable demonstrations
alongside other navigation objectives.
Hwang et al. [9] proposed a vision-based MORL framework for adapting robot navigation with discrete actions

to human preferences through demonstrations, trajectory
comparisons, and language instructions. However, their use
of demonstrations is limited to estimating corresponding bestrepresenting preference weights based on given objectives,
possibly losing nuanced behavior traits in the demonstration
data, whereas our approach directly integrates demonstration
data to shape navigation behavior.
III. O UR A PPROACH
A. Problem Statement
We consider a wheeled robot navigating in the vicinity of
a human and unknown obstacles, pursuing a local goal while
avoiding collisions. The robot is controlled via continuous
velocity commands. The human has certain preferences
about the navigation style of the robot that may change
depending on navigational context, such as task or time
constraints, and which should be considered by the robot
while navigating to the goal. These navigation preferences
can be expressed both in the form of a preference vector
and demonstrations. We assume the robot is provided a
robot-centric goal location and can reliably estimate the
human position, obstacles are perceived by the robot through
2D lidar. The navigation policy processes sensor data and
goal information along with a preference vector containing
user preferences, allowing for on-the-fly behavior adaptation
within a single policy. Our approach explicitly focuses on
single-human interaction, personalizing robot behavior based
on individual user preferences rather than group dynamics.
Code for our approach is available online.1
B. Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning
Multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) enhances
traditional RL by integrating multiple, often conflicting,
objectives [6]. In MORL, the agent is trained to learn policies
that strike a balance among these diverse objectives, as
opposed to a one-dimensional reward function. The MORL
problem is formulated within the framework of a Markov
Decision Process (MDP), defined by the tuple (S, A, P, R, γ).
Here, S is the state space, A is the action space, P :
S × A × S → [0, 1] is the state transition probability, and γ
is the discount factor. A distinctive feature of MORL is the
multi-dimensional reward function R : S × A → Rn , which
outputs a vector of rewards r t for n different objectives.
A single policy optimally adheres to a given combination
of preferences, represented by the convex preference weight
vector λ ∈ Rn . The learning algorithm optimizes a scalarized reward function Rλ (s, a) = λ⊤ r(s, a), itemizing the
different objectives.
We employ the preference-driven (PD-)MORL implementation of Basaklar et al. [15], precisely their TD3-based
algorithm, which can learn a single-network policy that
covers the entire preference space. PD-MORL achieves this
by four major modifications to TD3’s standard actor-criticstructure with respect to the policy loss and preferencespace exploration: i) A preference interpolator I(λ) = λp
1 Code
repository:
https://github.com/HumanoidsBonn/
demo_enhanced_morl_nav

projects the original preference vectors λ into a normalized
solution space, thereby improving the aligning of preferences
with multi-objective value solutions Q. ii) The framework
is complemented by an angle loss g(λp , Q), designed to
minimize the directional angle between the interpolated
preference vectors λp and the multi-objective vector Q, thus
improving preference-reflection. The actor network is updated
by maximizing the term λT Q, where λ is the original convex
preference vector and Q is the critic network’s vector-based
output, while simultaneously minimizing the directional angle
term. iii) To efficiently learn across the entire preference space
in PD-MORL, a hindsight experience replay mechanism [24]
enhances the preference vector diversity during training.
iv) The training process involves running a number of Cp
environments in parallel for N time steps, each tailored to
explore a distinct segment of the preference-vector space.
While Basaklar et al. originally evaluated their TD3-based
PD-MORL on gym benchmarks [16], we extend it to a threeobjective robotic navigation task. The focus of our study is on
task-related behavior adaptability, robustness, generalization,
and real-world deployment performance. To the best of our
knowledge, our study represents the first application of the
PD-MORL framework to real-world robot tasks, where sensorinduced noise and partial observability introduce additional
challenges.
1) State and Action Space: The state space includes the
local goal, human position, and obstacles detected by a lidar
sensor. The agent receives the relative 2D goal location pg
and human position ph in polar coordinates. The 360◦ lidar
scan, with a range of 4m, is min-pooled from 720 to Nlidar =
30 rays. These are combined in the state vector as st =
(pg , ph , Lt ), where Lt = dti |0 ≤ i < Nlidar .
The robot is controlled with linear and angular velocity
commands at = (v, ω), where v ∈ [0, 0.5]m s−1 and ω ∈
[−π, π]rad s−1 . The perception-action loop runs at 5Hz.
2) Networks: The networks of actor, critic, behavior
cloning policy, and reward model (see below) are fully
connected multi-layer perceptron (MLP) networks with an
identical architecture consisting of 4 layers with 256 neurons
each. The uniform architecture is a heuristic choice, validated
in preliminary experiments.
C. Incorporating Demonstrations
As one of our main contributions, we distill nuanced
navigation from demonstration trajectories τ into a reward
model that natively integrates into MORL as one of the
objectives and guides the learning agent to demonstrationlike behavior. Through this novel design choice, the influence
of demonstrations can be modulated by λ post-training.
A reward model is typically derived from pairwise A≻B
preference queries in a human feedback process via a
ranking loss [10]. However, demonstrations are typically
considered equally important, rendering them unsuitable for
a ranking-based reward model. Addressing the problem of
non-existent ranking from demonstration data, we use a
workaround involving artificial rankings. We employ the
disturbance-based reward extrapolation (D-REX) approach

Fig. 2: Exploration of D-REX-related demonstration parameters averaged
over 20 trajectory rollouts, measured against the optimal demonstration
behavior’s reward. a) The execution of the ϵ-greedy noise-injected behavior
cloning (BC) policy trained with a demonstration augmentation factor of
ND = 1,000 reveals a degradation of navigation performance measured by
the normalized core reward rcore with growing strength of the injected noise.
b) The demonstration augmentation factor ND indicates how many times
the optimal human-centric demonstration trajectory (see Sec.III-D.3) was
rolled out with randomized obstacle placement to form the training dataset,
showing increased performance with higher ND .

by Brown et al. [25], which imitates pairwise A≻B preference queries by ranking over noise-injected demonstration
trajectories. First, a behavior cloning (BC) policy πBC is
trained from ND demonstration trajectories, the collection of
which is outlined in Sec. III-D.3. Subsequently, the BC policy
πBC (·|ϵ) is executed with increasing level of ϵ-greedy policy
noise ϵ ∈ E = (ϵ1 , ϵ2 , . . . , ϵd ) with ϵ1 < ϵ2 < . . . < ϵd . In
short, low-noise trajectories almost perfectly resemble the
demonstration trajectory, while they slowly lose their shape
with growing levels of noise. Trajectory rollouts generated
with lower noise are automatically ranked superior compared
to their higher-noise counterparts. Finally, a rich preferenceranking dataset
Drank = {τi ≺ τj |τi ∼ πBC (·|ϵi ), τj ∼ πBC (·|ϵj ), ϵi > ϵj }
is obtained. From Drank , we train a reward model R̂(s, a) ∈
[0, 1] using the Bradley-Terry model [26] with its typical
implementation
asPa binary cross entropy loss such that
P
R̂
(s,
a)
<
θ
s∈τi
s∈τj R̂θ (s, a) when τi ≺ τj .
For our ranking dataset Drank , we choose a noise range
E = (0, . . . , 0.2) and obtain ND = 1,000 demonstration
augmentations with obstacle randomization from a single
demonstration pattern.
D. Reward Vector
The reward vector covers traditional navigational objectives,
subsequently referred to as core objectives, and three tuneable
distinct style objectives based on quantifiable metrics and
preference demonstrations. In our MORL setup, the core
objectives are summed and occupy the first entry in the
reward vector r t which is assigned a static preference weight
of one. Note that this is neglected in further notations of the
convex vector λ to focus on the tuneable objectives. For the
other objectives occupying entries in the reward vector, the
preference weights are dynamic. The reward vector for our
MORL framework consists of four components as explained
below:
t
t
r t = (rcore
, rt , rt
, refficiency
)
|{z} |demo distance
{z
}
static

dynamic objectives

(1)

1) Navigational Core Objectives: Independent of preferences, the agent must exhibit goal pursuance and collision avoidance. Goal-oriented navigation is achieved by
t
a continuous reward rgoal
= 125 · (dtg − dt−1
g ), based on
the change in distance dg = |pg | from the goal. The total
PT
t
cumulative goal reward R = t=0 rgoal
is non-discounted
to remain independent of the number of steps to the goal,
avoiding a bias towards shortest paths and thus the efficiency
preference objective. Collision avoidance uses a sparse penalty
t
rcollision
= −1,000 for contact between the robot and any
t
t
t
obstacle. The core reward function is rcore
= rgoal
+ rcollision
.
2) Tuneable Preference Objectives: Our three user-centric
style objectives cover demonstration-reflection, efficiency, and
proxemics: To include proxemics, an important comfort factor
in human-aware navigation, we define a quadratic distance
penalty for positional closeness dh = |ph | to the human
within a range dthresh = 2m as
rdistance = −10

(dh − dthresh )2
if dh ≤ dthresh ,
(dthresh − dmin )2

(2)

else zero, with dmin = 0.3m.
The second style objective is navigational efficiency, or
shortest path navigation, implemented with a constant time
t
penalty refficiency
= −10.
The third and last objective is demonstration-like behavior
t
rdemo
, as elaborated below. Note that all rewards of the
tuneable objectives are defined as penalties with uniform
range of [−10, 0].
3) Demonstration Acquisition and Reward: Demonstrations can capture nuanced navigation styles that are difficult to express using analytical reward functions, such
as characteristically-shaped trajectories when approaching
the user. In this work, we rely on a predefined optimal
demonstration pattern, see Fig. 3.A1 (black line), where
the robot circumnavigates the human in a distinct circular
manner. After directly approaching the human, at dh = 1m, it
executes a 90◦ left-hand turn and orbits the human clockwise
at a radius dh . Once between human and goal, it turns left
and proceeds directly towards the target. While not being
user-demonstrations, the distinct pattern enables a clear performance analysis, as its behavior is by design contradictory
to the other two objectives, efficiency and distance-keeping.
Specifically, the trajectories are only partially goal-directed,
t
conflicting refficiency
, and traverse close to the human at
t
dh = 1m, contradicting rdistance
with an impact radius of
2m. Anchored solely around the human and the goal position,
we can easily augment the single demonstration trajectory by
rolling it out ND times in randomized obstacle configurations,
recording only collision-free rollouts. The resulting dataset is
handed to the D-REX pipeline, as elaborated in Sec. III-C.
t
The final reward term is rdemo
= −10 · (R̂θ (st , at ) − 1).
IV. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
Our experimental evaluation is conducted to validate the
following claims:
• C1: The D-REX-based reward model successfully captures and teaches the demonstration patterns to the agent.

C2: We learn a preference-adaptable, demonstrationmodulating, yet reliable navigation policy.
• C3: PD-MORL is crucial to successfully learn our robot
navigation task.
• C4: Our policy generalizes from simulation to the real
world, even on a robot not used for training.
•

Our evaluation concludes with a sim-to-real transfer and
evaluation on two robots.
A. Training and Environment
We train using the iGibson simulator [27] with a simulated
Kobuki TurtleBot 2. Robot start and goal positions are
randomly sampled, 6 to 12m apart in open space. A static
human is placed between them, aligning with a static-human
demonstration pattern. Three static rectangular obstacles are
randomly placed, avoiding occupied positions. The robot must
navigate to the goal while avoiding both the human and obstacles, which may conflict with the human distance-keeping
objective. An episode terminates upon successfully reaching
the goal, robot collision, or a timeout after 300 steps. Training
is conducted for 600k steps across Cp = 3 environments,
using γ = 1.0, and the final model is used for evaluation.
For the evaluation of generalization to dynamic environments
only, not training, we simulate a moving human approaching
the robot with an opposite start goal configuration.
B. Qualitative Navigation Analysis
Figure 3 shows navigation strategies of our MORL agent
in static (A+B+E) and dynamic human (C+D) scenarios in
simulation, under varying preference weights and obstacle
configurations. Three subplot rows interpolate convex preferences between pairwise combinations of two objectives,
with the third objective fixed at zero. In Row 1, preferences
interpolate between distance and efficiency, parameterized by
µ ∈ [0, 1], with the vector λ1 (µ) = (0, µ, 1 − µ). The other
rows follow similar pairwise combinations.
The resulting set

i
i
i
,
1
−
,
0
|
µ
=
of λi (µ) is Λi =
N
N
N , i = 0, . . . , N
with N = 10, forming the test set Λ = Λ1 ∪ Λ2 ∪ Λ3 with a
total of 33 preference vectors, see Sec. IV-C.
The plots depict the robot’s trajectories from an initial
point (black dot) to a goal (blue star), considering static
obstacles and a human (red circle & arrow), with the optimal
demonstration trajectory (black line) included.
Starting with the static human in Fig.3A+B, the shift from
efficiency to distance-keeping (Fig.3.1) shows increasing
human distance along the path, with the robot eventually
passing closely without collision, reducing path length due
t
to the efficiency penalty refficiency
. Under maximum human
distance preference, the robot occasionally stays close to
obstacles before turning towards the goal after passing them.
For the shift from distance-keeping to demonstration-like
behavior (Fig. 3.2), the minimum distance to the human
decreases. Supporting C1, trajectories shape into the characteristic demonstration pattern of straight approach, circular
circumnavigation, and a goal-directed turn, yet sharp corners
near the human are less pronounced than in the demonstration.

Fig. 3: Trajectory rollouts in simulation for different preference vectors (rows) and different scenes with a static and a dynamic approaching human
(columns). As can be seen, the navigation policy shifts its behavior according to the set preference. The colorbars on the right indicate the interpolated
preference space Λi for each plot row. Static scenarios such as (A+B) were covered during training, while a moving human (C+D) and the corridor
environment (E) test for generalization. While shifting Row 1) from shortest driving behavior under the maximum efficiency preference (yellow) to
distance-keeping (blue), the minimum distance from the human increases. At the same time, a tendency to navigate alongside obstacles - if present close to
the path - has developed. Shifting towards the maximum demonstration preference (Row 2), the trajectory shapes increasingly resemble the demonstration
pattern (black). On the shift back to maximum efficiency (Row 3), the demonstration pattern disappears in favor of shortest trajectories. Comparing the
static (A+B) vs. moving human (C+D), the demonstration preference reflection becomes less distinct as the agent struggles to follow the static pattern that
moves with the now dynamic human, yet efficiency and distance preferences keep up with a moving human. In the corridor intersection scene (E), not
included during training of the policy, the agent successfully accounts for the wall, reducing the possible distance-keeping to the human. The varied angle
between human and goal from the robot’s perspective does not prevent the policy from first approaching the human under the maximum demonstration
preference, before continuing towards the goal.

Finally, shifting preferences from demonstration back to
efficiency (Fig. 3.3), demonstration-driven trajectories bend
around the human, while efficiency-driven ones head directly
to the goal after passing. When obstacles are near the human,
collisions are avoided, though at reduced distance. Under
maximum distance preference, human distance is maintained
before and after obstacles, and all trajectories pass the human
on the right, following the demonstration pattern.
To further evaluate the generalization and robustness of
our policy, we test it in a moving human environment and
a previously unseen scene. In this dynamic setting, which
was not covered during training, a human approaches at
0.5m s−1 (Fig. 3.C+D), the efficiency and distance-keeping
objectives are maintained without collisions. The avoidance
maneuvers occur more abruptly than in the static case, bending
sharply away from the human. As expected, the demonstration
pattern is less followed, with the orbiting part shrinking or
not completed due to the moving human.
Similarly, we assess generalization and robustness in an
unseen corridor intersection scenario (Fig. 3.E). The agent
successfully accounts for the presence of the wall, which
limits the possible distance it can maintain from the human.
Despite the varied angle between the human and the goal from
the robot’s perspective, the policy prioritizes initial approach
behavior, aligning with the maximum demonstration preference, before continuing toward the goal. This indicates that
the learned policy generalizes to unseen spatial configurations

while adhering to key objectives.
These results provide evidence for C1 and C2, showing
the robot’s ability to adjust its behavior from human-distant
to demonstration-driven and efficiency-focused navigation.
C. Quantitative Analysis
1) Preference Reflection: We conducted a quantitative
evaluation of the preference-reflecting agent using multiple
performance and navigation metrics (Fig. 4). The agent was
tested across 100 episodes in random environments, using
different interpolated preference weights λ ∈ Λ (colored
fractions in Fig.4e; see Sec. IV-B). Statistical significance
between mean values for the maximum preferences was
assessed using a Student’s t-test with Bonferroni-correction.
The agent (OUR) achieved a success rate of 100% with no
timeouts or collisions (Table I, first column). As the distance
preference increases, both minimum human distance and
navigation time rise (Fig. 4a+d), indicating longer trajectories
to maintain greater human distance.
To assess how well the demonstration trajectory is reflected (claim C1), we computed the Fréchet distance [28]
between the demonstration and executed trajectories (Fig. 4b).
The minimum mean Fréchet distance of 0.41m occurs
when demonstration preference is maximized. Efficiency and
distance-keeping preferences also reduce the Fréchet distance,
as the demonstration path passes close to the human.

in demonstrations. While OUR-RM performs with a similar
collision rate, its preference-reflection is slightly weaker than
OUR.
D. MORL Baseline

Fig. 4: Quantitative metrics of OUR agent for different preference configurations (e), tested for statistical significance for dissimilar means between the
maximum preferences, with *** for p < .001, and ns for not significant.
a) The navigation time is smallest for maximized efficiency preference, as
expected. b) The Fréchet distance to the demonstration trajectory decreases
as the demonstration preference increases. c) The minimum distance to
any obstacle is measured using the lidar. d) The minimum distance from
the human grows with its preference weight. The preference-independent
non-MORL policy CORE (red dotted line) that only obeys the navigational
core reward term rcore of collision avoidance and goal pursuance is included
in each plot.

Comparing the trends of minimum obstacle distance
(min(dobst ), Fig.4c) and minimum human distance (min(dh ),
Fig.4d), the agent clearly distinguishes between humans and
static obstacles. As the human distance preference increases,
the robot maintains a larger distance from the human, while
staying close to obstacles, accepting higher collision risk to
prioritize proxemic preferences.
Our quantitative analysis supports the findings from the
qualitative evaluation, providing measurable evidence for
research claims C1 and C2.
2) Ablation Study: We ablated the architecture with respect
to the state space and demonstration reward model, compare
Table I. The state space changes apply to all involved models:
D-REX BC policy, D-REX reward model, actor, and critic.
The ablations cover exclusion of human position (OUR-NH),
removal of the action at as input to the reward model leaving
t
rdemo
= R̂θ (st ) (OUR-RM), and the combination of both
(OUR-RM-NH). Note that the maximum preference vectors in
Table I are λdemo = (1, 0, 0), λdist = (0, 1, 0), λeff = (0, 0, 1),
respectively.
Compared to OUR, removing the human position from
the state space in OUR-NH and OUR-RM-NH reduces
distance-reflection capabilities. This is expected due to the
correlation between human position and distance preferences

As single-policy MORL approaches with continuous action
spaces are scarce due to the novelty of Basaklar’s PD-MORL
TD3-based algorithm, we implement an equivalent actorcritic-based MORL baseline with parameterized reward (-PR),
analogous to the baselines in [17]. Specifically, the handling
of reward and Q value differs: In the baseline, the critic
predicts a scalar Q corresponding to the parameterized reward
function Rλ (s, a) = λ⊤ r(s, a), thereby learning a mixed
representation of all objectives. In contrast, PD-MORL’s critic
outputs a vector-based Q, with each component corresponding
to a separate objective, thus maintaining objective-specific
representations throughout learning. Furthermore, the four
performance-boosting modifications of PD-MORL are not
included in the baseline, compare Sec. III-B. The learning
task characteristics and reward vector remain unchanged.
During training, convex preference weights are sampled
at the beginning of each episode. Among the baseline actorcritic implementations, TD3 failed to converge on the task,
whereas SAC [29] achieved better results. Performance further
improved when adjusting the discount factor from γ = 1.0 to
γ = 0.98 in SAC-PR-γ (see Tab. I). Nevertheless, both SACPR and SAC-PR-γ average in success below 55 %. Note that
SAC-PR and SAC-PR-γ show weaker preference reflection as
compared to OUR, while SAC-PR failed entirely on the edgecase preferences λdemo = (1, 0, 0) and λeff = (0, 0, 1). The
results highlight the superiority of PD-MORL for learning
the robot navigation task, supporting C4.
1) Non-MORL Core Navigation Agent: To contextualize
the core navigation objectives, we train and quantitatively
evaluate a preference-independent, non-MORL policy CORE
that optimizes only the navigational core rewards rcore (goal
and collision), compare the red dotted line in Fig. 4. Two
metrics stand out: The MORL agent prioritizes obstacles
over humans, while the non-MORL baseline, lacking a
human-distance reward, treats both similarly. This results in
comparable minimum values (dh = 0.64m, dobst = 0.72m),
contrasting with our MORL agent. Its higher demonstration
Metric

λ

OUR -NH -RM -RM-NH SAC-PR -PR-γ

SR↑ [%]
CR↓ [%]
TR↓ [%]

Λ
Λ
Λ

100
0
0

96.8 100
2.7
0
0.5
0

79.6
11.4
9.0

45.4
53.2
1.2

54.5
44.4
1.1

min(dh )↑ [m] λdist 1.18 0.52 1.16
Fréchet↓ [m] λdemo 0.41 0.57 0.46
Nav. time↓ [s] λeff 17.3 16.9 17.4

0.48
0.49
19.2

1.06
-

0.91
1.06
20.8

TABLE I: Quantitative analysis, ablation, and baseline study with respect
to the state space and reward model, bold number highlighting the
highest performance. For the ablation identifiers and preference vectors
{λdist , λdemo , λeff }, please refer to Sec. IV-C.2. For brevity, the identifiers
are shortened after OUR, so that, e.g., -NH corresponds to OUR-NH with
the human pose state excluded. The baselines with parameterized rewards
are denoted with SAC-RP and SAC-PR-γ, short -PR-γ. The results were
averaged over 100 trajectories for single λ, and for the success rate (SR),
collision rate (CR), and timeout rate (TR) additionally over all λi ∈ Λ,
precisely 33 × 100 = 3, 300 trajectories. The baseline SAC-PR had no
successful trajectories under λdemo and λeff .

Fig. 5: Real-world experiment setup (top) and results (bottom) with the
policy OUR in a sim-to-real transfer with the Kobuki TurtleBot 2 (left) and
a the Toyota HSR (right). With a static human as during training (A+B),
the navigation behavior in the real world successfully reflects varying the
preferences on both robots. While the TurtleBot exhibits better demonstration
reflection, the HSR keeps more distance from the human under the maximum
distance preference. With a dynamic approaching human (C+D) that was
not accounted for during training, the preference reflection decreases.

Fréchet distance further confirms the absence of demonstration knowledge.
E. Real-World Transfer
We evaluated our tuneable policy on a Kobuki TurtleBot
2 using ROS [30] and transferred the TurtleBot-trained
policy to a Toyota Human Support Robot (HSR). The agent
received ground truth human and goal positions, with the
dynamic human localized via a Vive VR tracker. The HSR’s
lidar, mounted in the front of its rotation center, may cause
state space discrepancies for the policy. Due to its 270◦
coverage, compared to the TurtleBot’s 360◦ lidar, the rear
distance readings were filled with the maximum range of 4m.
The procedure ensures state consistency under the conservative assumption that rear obstacles are unlikely to impact
navigation, as the robot can only move forward. Another
discrepancy arises in velocity command execution, both in
sim-to-real transfer and between robots, due to differences in

actuator dynamics and drive mechanisms, potentially affecting
navigation performance. We ran navigation tests on both
robots for the preference vectors λ ∈ Λ with N = 5 (see
Sec. IV-B).
The recorded TurtleBot trajectories are shown in Fig. 5.A
and the HSR trajectories in Fig. 5.B. Both robots adapt their
behavior according to preferences. For the maximum distance
preference (Fig. 5.A1), the TurtleBot shows oscillations,
presumable due to slight over-steering, while the HSR drives
closer to obstacles and exhibits a wider oscillatory motion
near the goal (Fig. 5.B1). These differences may result from
lidar state mismatches (e.g., positional offset) or slower
action execution due to inertia. For maximum demonstration
reflection, the TurtleBot’s trajectory aligns better with the
demonstration than the HSR (Fig. 5.2).
Both robots avoid collisions with dynamically approaching humans (Fig. 5.C+D). As in the dynamic simulations
experiments (Fig. 3), avoidance sharpens for the demonstration objective but fades as the human and robot pass
each other. Under the distance preference, sharper inward
steering and subsequent overshooting behind the human
in simulation become more pronounced in the real world,
compare (Fig. 3.C1+D1). We attribute the sharper inward
steering to the static training environment, which prevented
the agent from learning in the presence of a moving human.
Under static conditions, the agent typically maintains a
fixed distance on the human’s side, forming a distance-angle
mapping for avoidance. This mapping is disrupted by the
dynamic human, causing the agent to turn inward as the
human passes more quickly. Efficiency-focused behavior
transfers flawlessly. Despite minor sim-to-real differences, all
real-world trajectories remained collision-free, demonstrating
robust sim-to-real generalization. See the supplemental video
for real-world experiments.2 In conclusion, the policy transfers
smoothly to real robots, supporting research claim C4.
V. C ONCLUSION
In summary, we introduced an innovative framework
fusing multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) with
demonstration-based learning for adaptable, personalized
robot navigation around a user with changing preferences. Our
approach successfully modulates the conflicting objectives
of demonstration data reflection, distance keeping, and
navigational efficiency without retraining. To achieve this,
we distill demonstration data into a reward model that
shapes the agent’s trajectories during navigation with variable
strength. In various qualitative and quantitative experiments,
we demonstrated the adaptability to varying preferences and
scenarios. Finally, we successfully deployed the learned agent
on two real robots.
By accepting an externally controlled preference vector,
the approach enables structured adaptation to changing user
needs with a clear protocol for preference representation.
Future research could focus on deriving such vectors from
human feedback using a dedicated context-aware preference
prediction agent.
2 Supplemental video: https://youtu.be/vS22B3HRdL4

R EFERENCES
[1] P. Vamplew, R. Dazeley, C. Foale, S. Firmin, and J. Mummery, “Humanaligned artificial intelligence is a multiobjective problem,” Ethics and
Information Technology, vol. 20, no. 1, Mar. 2018.
[2] J. de Heuvel, N. Corral, L. Bruckschen, and M. Bennewitz, “Learning
Personalized Human-Aware Robot Navigation Using Virtual Reality
Demonstrations from a User Study,” in 2022 31th IEEE International
Conference on Robot Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN),
2022.
[3] C. Mavrogiannis, F. Baldini, A. Wang, D. Zhao, P. Trautman, A. Steinfeld, and J. Oh, “Core Challenges of Social Robot Navigation: A
Survey,” ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction, vol. 12, Feb.
2023.
[4] C. Pérez-D’Arpino, C. Liu, P. Goebel, R. Martı́n-Martı́n, and
S. Savarese, “Robot Navigation in Constrained Pedestrian Environments
using Reinforcement Learning,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May 2021.
[5] J. de Heuvel, N. Corral, B. Kreis, J. Conradi, A. Driemel, and
M. Bennewitz, “Learning Depth Vision-Based Personalized Robot
Navigation From Dynamic Demonstrations in Virtual Reality,” in 2023
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), Oct. 2023.
[6] C. F. Hayes, R. Rădulescu, E. Bargiacchi, J. Källström, M. Macfarlane,
M. Reymond, T. Verstraeten, L. M. Zintgraf, R. Dazeley, F. Heintz,
E. Howley, A. A. Irissappane, P. Mannion, A. Nowé, G. Ramos,
M. Restelli, P. Vamplew, and D. M. Roijers, “A practical guide to multiobjective reinforcement learning and planning,” Autonomous Agents
and Multi-Agent Systems, vol. 36, no. 1, Apr. 2022.
[7] J. Choi, C. Dance, J.-e. Kim, K.-s. Park, J. Han, J. Seo, and M. Kim,
“Fast Adaptation of Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based Navigation
Skills to Human Preference,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, May 2020.
[8] L. Keselman, K. Shih, M. Hebert, and A. Steinfeld, “Optimizing
Algorithms from Pairwise User Preferences,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
Oct. 2023.
[9] M. Hwang, L. Weihs, C. Park, K. Lee, A. Kembhavi, and K. Ehsani,
“Promptable Behaviors: Personalizing Multi-Objective Rewards from
Human Preferences,” in 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). IEEE, June 2024.
[10] D. Marta, S. Holk, C. Pek, J. Tumova, and I. Leite, “Aligning Human
Preferences with Baseline Objectives in Reinforcement Learning,” in
2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), May 2023.
[11] G. Ferrer and A. Sanfeliu, “Anticipative kinodynamic planning: Multiobjective robot navigation in urban and dynamic environments,”
Autonomous Robots, vol. 43, no. 6, Aug. 2019.
[12] S. Kumar and A. Sikander, “A modified probabilistic roadmap algorithm
for efficient mobile robot path planning,” Engineering Optimization,
vol. 55, no. 9, Sept. 2023.
[13] S. B. Banisetty, S. Forer, L. Yliniemi, M. Nicolescu, and D. Feil-Seifer,
“Socially Aware Navigation: A Non-linear Multi-objective Optimization
Approach,” ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., vol. 11, no. 2, July 2021.
[14] R. Yang, X. Sun, and K. Narasimhan, “A Generalized Algorithm for
Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning and Policy Adaptation,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2019.
[15] T. Basaklar, S. Gumussoy, and U. Y. Ogras, “PD-MORL: PreferenceDriven Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning Algorithm,” Proceed-

ings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
[16] J. Xu, Y. Tian, P. Ma, D. Rus, S. Sueda, and W. Matusik, “PredictionGuided Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning for Continuous Robot
Control,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR, Nov. 2020.
[17] X. He and C. Lv, “Toward personalized decision making for autonomous vehicles: A constrained multi-objective reinforcement learning technique,” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 156, Nov. 2023.
[18] S. Huang, A. Abdolmaleki, G. Vezzani, P. Brakel, D. J. Mankowitz,
M. Neunert, S. Bohez, Y. Tassa, N. Heess, M. Riedmiller, and
R. Hadsell, “A Constrained Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning
Framework,” in Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, Jan. 2022.
[19] G. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Dong, W. Cai, and C. Sun, “Multi-objective
deep reinforcement learning for crowd-aware robot navigation with
dynamic human preference,” Neural Computing and Applications, June
2023.
[20] C.-L. Cheng, C.-C. Hsu, S. Saeedvand, and J.-H. Jo, “Multi-objective
crowd-aware robot navigation system using deep reinforcement learning,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 151, Jan. 2024.
[21] K. Lee, S. Kim, and J. Choi, “Adaptive and explainable deployment of
navigation skills via hierarchical deep reinforcement learning,” in 2023
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2023.
[22] N. Wilde, S. L. Smith, and J. Alonso-Mora, “Scalarizing MultiObjective Robot Planning Problems Using Weighted Maximization,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 3, Mar. 2024.
[23] A. Ballou, X. Alameda-Pineda, and C. Reinke, “Variational meta
reinforcement learning for social robotics,” Applied Intelligence, vol. 53,
no. 22, Nov. 2023.
[24] M. Andrychowicz, F. Wolski, A. Ray, J. Schneider, R. Fong, P. Welinder,
B. McGrew, J. Tobin, O. Pieter Abbeel, and W. Zaremba, “Hindsight
Experience Replay,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[25] D. S. Brown, W. Goo, and S. Niekum, “Better-than-Demonstrator
Imitation Learning via Automatically-Ranked Demonstrations,” in
Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, May
2020.
[26] R. A. Bradley and M. E. Terry, “Rank analysis of incomplete block
designs: I. The method of paired comparisons,” Biometrika, vol. 39,
no. 3/4, 1952.
[27] C. Li, F. Xia, R. Martı́n-Martı́n, M. Lingelbach, S. Srivastava, B. Shen,
K. E. Vainio, C. Gokmen, G. Dharan, T. Jain, A. Kurenkov, K. Liu,
H. Gweon, J. Wu, L. Fei-Fei, and S. Savarese, “iGibson 2.0: ObjectCentric Simulation for Robot Learning of Everyday Household Tasks,”
in Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR,
Jan. 2022.
[28] H. Alt and M. Godau, “Computing the fréchet distance between two
polygonal curves,” International Journal of Computational Geometry
& Applications, vol. 05, no. 01n02, Mar. 1995.
[29] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft Actor-Critic:
Off-Policy Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement Learning with a
Stochastic Actor,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR, July 2018.
[30] M. Quigley, K. Conley, B. Gerkey, J. Faust, T. Foote, J. Leibs,
R. Wheeler, and A. Y. Ng, “ROS: An open-source Robot Operating
System,” in ICRA Workshop on Open Source Software, vol. 3. Kobe,
Japan, 2009.

